about how long have these symptoms been going on?
and all chest pain should be treated this way especially with your age
and along with a fever
and also needs to be checked your cholesterol blood pressure
and are you having a fever now?
and are you having any of the following symptoms with your chest pain
and are you having a runny nose?
and are you having this chest pain now?
and besides do you have difficulty breathing
and can you tell me what other symptoms are you having along with this?
and does this pain move from your chest?
and drink lots of fluids
and how high has your fever been
and i have a cough too
and i have a little cold and a cough
and i'm really having some bad chest pain today
and is this the right time for your hay fever
and it get the chest pain
and i think i have a little bit of a fever
and i want you to describe where the chest pain is
and she is sorta have the same symptoms
and tell me what symptoms are you having now?
and they're having some fevers as well
and with your history of diabetes
and you know it feels like my chest is like gonna crush
and you know people cough on me all the time
and you're having chest pain
and your symptoms do not go away in five days
and you said this is a pressure in your chest
anyone in the family have a heart problem heart disease heart attack high cholesterol high blood pressure
any other symptoms or problems that you notice with the muscle aches?
any sharp pain on your left side of your chest?
are there other people sick as you at home with your same symptoms?
are you having any difficulty breathing now
are you having any other symptoms?
are you having any shortness of breath?
are you still having the chest pain
because this is flu season
besides the diabetes do you have other problems or important diseases?
but also we shouldn't be put aside for the heart cardiac origin chest pain
but a more important problem now is this chest pain
but if you have the cough
but i have difficulty breathing
but i know lot of people cough on me
but we need to treat every chest pain with the utmost seriousness
but you're breathing all right right now right?
'cause of this chest pain i totally forgot
'cause they're having a cough
does it feel like somebody squeezing your chest
do still feel like shortness of breath
do they complain of being sick similar symptoms?
do you have any blood pressure problem as far as you know?
do you have any other chronic like high blood pressure or anything like that?
do you have any other diseases chronic medical problems like diabetes?
do you have any shortness of breath with that chest pain?
do you have high blood pressure?
do you have some shortness of breath goes with that?
do you know what symptoms she was having?
do your relatives have the same symptoms
do you see the image?
drink plenty of fluids today
have a dry cough a cold and runny nose vomiting diarrhea
however i take tests for the diabetes
however she has symptoms quite similar to mine
how high is your fever?
how' s your blood pressure?
i don't think i have high blood pressure
i feel a pain in the chest here in the front part of the chest
if you continue to have high fevers
if you have a fever of a hundred and two or higher
if you think that your symptoms or problems warrant a better look
i got a fever yesterday
i got a slight fever too
i had a fever yesterday
i had a short sharp pain in my chest
i have a sharp pain here in the chest
i have hay fever though too
i have made on the body around the chest area?
i have some difficulty breathing too
i'll send you an image
i'm having some chest pain today
i'm just having some headaches and some fever today
in my opinion it is flu
in my opinion this is a little flu
i see it going from the center of your chest going up to your neck
is it like some heavy heavy person sitting on your chest?
it all started with the headaches and with the fever about the same time
it hurts in the chest
it hurts in the middle of my chest
it is a pressure like chest pain
it is in my chest
it is in the center of my chest
it is in the center of the chest
it is occurring right in the middle of my chest
it is right in the center of my chest
it sounds like you just may have the garden variety cold or a flu
i've got pain in my chest
i've very concerned of this chest pain
i want you to tell me in describing this chest pain
i will send you an image
i will send you an image on your screen
like high blood pressure or diabetes
like right in the center of the chest
most of the time it is this type of chest pain
my sister has similar symptoms
now for the fever you can take a tachipirina sweet
now i send you an image
now mary how many days have you had the symptoms
now you said you have a chest pain
occasionally i have some chest pain
okay are you having any other symptoms along with this other than just the pain
or if you have high blood pressure
or somebody sitting on your chest?
pretty much the same with the fever and the cough headache and muscle pains
right in the middle of my chest
show me on this image where you feel the pain
since you have a fever
so do you think that some of these symptoms could be related to being pregnant?
so your chest pain started this morning
so your children are having some of the same symptoms?
tell me about your chest pain
the fever increases at night
the fever i've had for the last two days
the fever started to increase last night
the fever started two days ago
the muscle pains with the hay fever
this is doctor porter in the emergency room triage center
well can you tell me a little bit more about your chest pain?
well from my point of view it is a little flu
well i feel a pain in the front of my body here in my chest
well i've been having a strong pain in my chest
well madam from listening to your symptoms it sounds like you've got one of the flu viruses
well when i have that pain in my chest
what kinda pain do you have in your chest?
when this chest pain started?
where do you have the pain in the chest?
where you feel this chest pain eel this chest t
you are probably having chest pain
you feel like tightness on your chest
you know i got diabetes and stuff
you said you're having this chest pain
