Breaking myth regarding the corona virus (adopted from WHO) 
1.     Exposing yourself to the sun or to temperatures higher than 25C degrees DOES NOT prevent the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). 
2.     You can recover from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19. Catching the  new coronavirus DOES NOT mean you will have it for life. 
3.     Being able to hold your breath for 10 seconds or more without coughing or feeling discomfort DOES NOT mean you are free from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) or any other lung disease. 
4.     Drinking alcohol DOES NOT protect you against COVID-19 and can be dangerous. 
5.     COVID-19 virus CAN be transmitted in areas with hot and humid climates. 
6.     Cold weather and snow CANNOT kill the new coronavirus. 
7.    Taking a hot bath DOES NOT prevent the new coronavirus disease. 
8.     The new coronavirus CANNOT be transmitted through mosquito bites. 
9.     Hand dryers are NOT effective in killing the new coronavirus. 
10.  Spraying alcohol or chlorine all over your body CANNOT kill the new coronavirus. 
11.  Vaccines against pneumonia DO NOT protect you against the new coronavirus. 
12.  Regularly rinsing your nose with saline DOES NOT help prevent infection with the new coronavirus. 
13.  Eating garlic DOES NOT help prevent infection with the new coronavirus. 
14.  Can an ultraviolet disinfection lamp kill the new coronavirus? 
UV lamps should not be used to sterilize hands or other areas of skin as UV radiation can cause skin irritation. 
15.  How effective are thermal scanners in detecting people infected with the new coronavirus? 
Thermal scanners are effective in detecting people who have developed a fever (i.e. have a higher than normal body temperature) because of infection with the new coronavirus. However, they cannot detect people who are infected but are not yet sick with fever. This is because it takes between 2 and 10 days before people who are infected become sick and develop a fever. 
16.  Does the new coronavirus affect older people, or are younger people also susceptible? 
No. People of all ages can be infected by the new coronavirus (2019-nCoV). 
17.  Are antibiotics effective in preventing and treating the new coronavirus? 
No. antibiotics do not work against viruses, only bacteria. 
18.  Are there any specific medicines to prevent or treat the new coronavirus? 
To date, there is no specific medicine recommended to prevent or treat the new coronavirus. 