Coronavirus
Coronaviruses are a group of related viruses that cause diseases in mammals and birds.
In humans, coronaviruses cause respiratory tract infections that can be mild, such as some cases of the common cold (among other possible causes, predominantly rhinoviruses), and others that can be lethal, such as SARS, MERS, and COVID-19.
Symptoms in other species vary: in chickens, they cause an upper respiratory tract disease, while in cows and pigs they cause diarrhea.
There are yet to be vaccines or antiviral drugs to prevent or treat human coronavirus infections.
Coronaviruses constitute the subfamily Orthocoronavirinae, in the family Coronaviridae, order Nidovirales, and realm Riboviria.
They are enveloped viruses with a positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome and a nucleocapsid of helical symmetry.
The genome size of coronaviruses ranges from approximately 27 to 34 kilobases, the largest among known RNA viruses.
The name coronavirus is derived from the Latin corona, meaning "crown" or "halo", which refers to the characteristic appearance reminiscent of a crown or a solar corona around the virions (virus particles) when viewed under two-dimensional transmission electron microscopy, due to the surface covering in club-shaped protein spikes.
Human coronaviruses were first discovered in the late 1960s.
The earliest ones discovered were an infectious bronchitis virus in chickens and two in human patients with the common cold (later named human coronavirus 229E and human coronavirus OC43).
Other members of this family have since been identified, including SARS-CoV in 2003, HCoV NL63 in 2004, HKU1 in 2005, MERS-CoV in 2012, and SARS-CoV-2 (formerly known as 2019-nCoV) in 2019.
Most of these have involved serious respiratory tract infections.
The name "coronavirus" is derived from Latin corona, meaning "crown" or "wreath", itself a borrowing from Greek κορώνη korṓnē, "garland, wreath".
The name refers to the characteristic appearance of virions (the infective form of the virus) by electron microscopy, which have a fringe of large, bulbous surface projections creating an image reminiscent of a crown or of a solar corona.
This morphology is created by the viral spike peplomers, which are proteins on the surface of the virus.
Coronaviruses are large pleomorphic spherical particles with bulbous surface projections.
The diameter of the virus particles is around 120 nm.
The envelope of the virus in electron micrographs appears as a distinct pair of electron dense shells.The viral envelope consists of a lipid bilayer where the membrane (M), envelope (E) and spike (S) structural proteins are anchored.
A subset of coronaviruses (specifically the members of betacoronavirus subgroup A) also have a shorter spike-like surface protein called hemagglutinin esterase (HE).Inside the envelope, there is the nucleocapsid, which is formed from multiple copies of the nucleocapsid (N) protein, which are bound to the positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome in a continuous beads-on-a-string type conformation.
The genome size for coronaviruses ranges from approximately 27 to 34 kilobases.
The lipid bilayer envelope, membrane proteins, and nucleocapsid protect the virus when it is outside the host cell.
Infection begins when the viral spike (S) glycoprotein attaches to its complementary host cell receptor, which usually  is the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
After attachment, a protease of the host cell cleaves and activates the receptor-attached spike protein.
Depending on the host cell protease available, cleavage and activation allows cell the entry entry by endocytosis or direct fusion of the viral envelop with the host membrane.On entry into the host cell, the virus particle is uncoated, and its genome enters the cell cytoplasm.
The coronavirus RNA genome has a 5′ methylated cap and a 3′ polyadenylated tail, which allows the RNA to attach to the host cell's ribosome for translation.
The host ribosome translates the initial overlapping open reading frame of the virus genome and forms a long polyprotein.
The polyprotein has its own proteases which cleave the polyprotein into multiple nonstructural proteins.
A number of the nonstructural proteins coalesce to form a multi-protein replicase-transcriptase complex (RTC).
The main replicase-transcriptase protein is the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp).
It is directly involved in the replication and transcription of RNA from an RNA strand.
The other nonstructural proteins in the complex assist in the replication and transcription process.
The exoribonuclease non-structural protein, for instance, provides extra fidelity to replication by providing a proofreading function which the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase lacks.One of the main functions of the complex is to replicate the viral genome.
RdRp directly mediates the synthesis of negative-sense genomic RNA from the positive-sense genomic RNA.
This is followed by the replication of positive-sense genomic RNA from the negative-sense genomic RNA.
The other important function of the complex is to transcribe the viral genome.
RdRp directly mediates the synthesis of negative-sense subgenomic RNA molecules from the positive-sense genomic RNA.
This is followed by the transcription of these negative-sense subgenomic RNA molecules to their corresponding positive-sense mRNAs.The replicated positive-sense genomic RNA becomes the genome of the progeny viruses.
The mRNAs are gene transcripts of the last third of the virus genome after the initial overlapping reading frame.
These mRNAs are translated by the host's ribosomes into the structural proteins and a number of accessory proteins.
RNA translation occurs inside the endoplasmic reticulum.
The viral structural proteins S, E, and M move along the secretory pathway into the Golgi intermediate compartment.
There, the M proteins direct most protein-protein interactions required for assembly of viruses following its binding to the nucleocapsid.
Progeny viruses are then released from the host cell by exocytosis through secretory vesicles.
Human to human transmission of coronaviruses is primarily thought to occur among close contacts via respiratory droplets generated by sneezing and coughing.
The interaction of the coronavirus spike protein with its complement host cell receptor is central in determining the tissue tropism, infectivity, and species range of the virus.
The SARS coronavirus, for example, infects human cells by attaching to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor.
The scientific name for coronavirus is Orthocoronavirinae or Coronavirinae.
Coronavirus belongs to the family of Coronaviridae.
Genus: Alphacoronavirus
Genus Betacoronavirus; type species: Murine coronavirus
Species: Betacoronavirus 1, Human coronavirus HKU1, Murine coronavirus, Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5, Rousettus bat coronavirus HKU9, Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4, Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, Human coronavirus OC43, Hedgehog coronavirus 1 (EriCoV)
Species: Beluga whale coronavirus SW1, Infectious bronchitis virus
The most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of all coronaviruses has been estimated to have existed as recently as 8000 BCE, though some models place the MRCA as far back as 55 million years or more, implying long term coevolution with bats.
The MRCAs of the alphacoronavirus line has been placed at about 2400 BCE, the betacoronavirus line at 3300 BCE, the gammacoronavirus line at 2800 BCE, and the deltacoronavirus line at about 3000 BCE.
It appears that bats and birds, as warm-blooded flying vertebrates, are ideal hosts for the coronavirus gene source (with bats for alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus, and birds for gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus) to fuel coronavirus evolution and dissemination.Bovine coronavirus and canine respiratory coronaviruses diverged from a common ancestor recently (~ 1950).
Bovine coronavirus and human coronavirus OC43 diverged around the 1890s.
Bovine coronavirus diverged from the equine coronavirus species at the end of the 18th century.The MRCA of human coronavirus OC43 has been dated to the 1950s.MERS-CoV, although related to several bat coronavirus species, appears to have diverged from these several centuries ago.
The human coronavirus NL63 and a bat coronavirus shared an MRCA 563–822 years ago.The most closely related bat coronavirus and SARS-CoV diverged in 1986.
A path of evolution of the SARS virus and keen relationship with bats have been proposed.
The authors suggest that the coronaviruses have been coevolved with bats for a long time and the ancestors of SARS-CoV first infected the species of the genus Hipposideridae, subsequently spread to species of the Rhinolophidae and then to civets, and finally to humans.Alpaca coronavirus and human coronavirus 229E diverged before 1960.
Coronaviruses vary significantly in risk factor.
Some can kill more than 30% of those infected (such as MERS-CoV), and some are relatively harmless, such as the common cold.
Coronaviruses cause colds with major symptoms, such as fever, and sore throat from swollen adenoids, occurring primarily in the winter and early spring seasons.
Coronaviruses can cause pneumonia (either direct viral pneumonia or a secondary bacterial pneumonia) and bronchitis (either direct viral bronchitis or a secondary bacterial bronchitis).
The much publicized human coronavirus discovered in 2003, SARS-CoV, which causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), has a unique pathogenesis because it causes both upper and lower respiratory tract infections.Seven strains of human coronaviruses are known, of which four produce the generally mild symptoms of the common cold:
Human coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43)
Human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63, New Haven coronavirus)
Human coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E)– and three, symptoms that are potentially severe:
Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), previously known as novel coronavirus 2012 and HCoV-EMC
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV or "SARS-classic")
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), previously known as 2019-nCoV or "novel coronavirus 2019"The coronaviruses HCoV-229E, -NL63, -OC43, and -HKU1 continually circulate in the human population and cause respiratory infections in adults and children world-wide.
Outbreaks of coronavirus types of relatively high mortality are as follows:
In 2003, following the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) which had begun the prior year in Asia, and secondary cases elsewhere in the world, the World Health Organization (WHO) issued a press release stating that a novel coronavirus identified by a number of laboratories was the causative agent for SARS.
The virus was officially named the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV).
More than 8,000 people were infected, about ten percent of whom died.
In September 2012, a new type of coronavirus was identified, initially called Novel Coronavirus 2012, and now officially named Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV).
The World Health Organization issued a global alert soon after.
The WHO update on 28 September 2012 said the virus did not seem to pass easily from person to person.
However, on 12 May 2013, a case of human-to-human transmission in France was confirmed by the French Ministry of Social Affairs and Health.
In addition, cases of human-to-human transmission were reported by the Ministry of Health in Tunisia.
Two confirmed cases involved people who seemed to have caught the disease from their late father, who became ill after a visit to Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Despite this, it appears the virus had trouble spreading from human to human, as most individuals who are infected do not transmit the virus.
By 30 October 2013, there were 124 cases and 52 deaths in Saudi Arabia.After the Dutch Erasmus Medical Centre sequenced the virus, the virus was given a new name, Human Coronavirus–Erasmus Medical Centre (HCoV-EMC).
The final name for the virus is Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV).
In May 2014, the only two United States cases of MERS-CoV infection were recorded, both occurring in healthcare workers who worked in Saudi Arabia and then travelled to the U.S. One was treated in Indiana and one in Florida.
Both were hospitalized temporarily and then discharged.In May 2015, an outbreak of MERS-CoV occurred in the Republic of Korea, when a man who had traveled to the Middle East, visited 4 hospitals in the Seoul area to treat his illness.
This caused one of the largest outbreaks of MERS-CoV outside the Middle East.
As of December 2019, 2,468 cases of MERS-CoV infection had been confirmed by laboratory tests, 851 of which were fatal, a mortality rate of approximately 34.5%.
In December 2019, a pneumonia outbreak was reported in Wuhan, China.
On 31 December 2019, the outbreak was traced to a novel strain of coronavirus, which was given the interim name 2019-nCoV by the World Health Organization (WHO), later renamed SARS-CoV-2 by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses.
Some researchers have suggested that the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market may not be the original source of viral transmission to humans.As of 22 March 2020, there have been at least 14,366 confirmed deaths and more than 328,275 confirmed cases in the coronavirus pneumonia pandemic.
The Wuhan strain has been identified as a new strain of Betacoronavirus from group 2B with approximately 70% genetic similarity to the SARS-CoV.
The virus has a 96% similarity to a bat coronavirus, so it is widely suspected to originate from bats as well.
The pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions and nationwide lockdowns in several countries.
Coronaviruses have been recognized as causing pathological conditions in veterinary medicine since the early 1970s.
Except for avian infectious bronchitis, the major related diseases have mainly an intestinal location.
Coronaviruses primarily infect the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tract of mammals and birds.
They also cause a range of diseases in farm animals and domesticated pets, some of which can be serious and are a threat to the farming industry.
In chickens, the infectious bronchitis virus (IBV), a coronavirus, targets not only the respiratory tract but also the urogenital tract.
The virus can spread to different organs throughout the chicken.
Economically significant coronaviruses of farm animals include porcine coronavirus (transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus, TGE) and bovine coronavirus, which both result in diarrhea in young animals.
Feline coronavirus: two forms, feline enteric coronavirus is a pathogen of minor clinical significance, but spontaneous mutation of this virus can result in feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), a disease associated with high mortality.
Similarly, there are two types of coronavirus that infect ferrets: Ferret enteric coronavirus causes a gastrointestinal syndrome known as epizootic catarrhal enteritis (ECE), and a more lethal systemic version of the virus (like FIP in cats) known as ferret systemic coronavirus (FSC).
There are two types of canine coronavirus (CCoV), one that causes mild gastrointestinal disease and one that has been found to cause respiratory disease.
Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) is a coronavirus that causes an epidemic murine illness with high mortality, especially among colonies of laboratory mice.
Sialodacryoadenitis virus (SDAV) is highly infectious coronavirus of laboratory rats, which can be transmitted between individuals by direct contact and indirectly by aerosol.
Acute infections have high morbidity and tropism for the salivary, lachrymal and harderian glands.A HKU2-related bat coronavirus called swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV) causes diarrhea in pigs.Prior to the discovery of SARS-CoV, MHV had been the best-studied coronavirus both in vivo and in vitro as well as at the molecular level.
Some strains of MHV cause a progressive demyelinating encephalitis in mice which has been used as a murine model for multiple sclerosis.
Significant research efforts have been focused on elucidating the viral pathogenesis of these animal coronaviruses, especially by virologists interested in veterinary and zoonotic diseases.
Porcine coronavirus (transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus of pigs, TGEV).
Bovine coronavirus (BCV), responsible for severe profuse enteritis in of young calves.
Feline coronavirus (FCoV) causes mild enteritis in cats as well as severe Feline infectious peritonitis (other variants of the same virus).
the two types of canine coronavirus (CCoV) (one causing enteritis, the other found in respiratory diseases).
Turkey coronavirus (TCV) causes enteritis in turkeys.
Ferret enteric coronavirus causes epizootic catarrhal enteritis in ferrets.
Ferret systemic coronavirus causes FIP-like systemic syndrome in ferrets.
Pantropic canine coronavirus.
Rabbit enteric coronavirus causes acute gastrointestinal disease and diarrhea in young European rabbits.
Mortality rates are high.
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PED or PEDV), has emerged around the world.
In common with the genomes of all other RNA viruses, coronavirus genomes contain cis-acting RNA elements that ensure the specific replication of viral RNA by a virally encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
The embedded cis-acting elements devoted to coronavirus replication constitute a small fraction of the total genome, but this is presumed to be a reflection of the fact that coronaviruses have the largest genomes of all RNA viruses.
The boundaries of cis-acting elements essential to replication are fairly well-defined, and the RNA secondary structures of these regions are understood.
However, how these cis-acting structures and sequences interact with the viral replicase and host cell components to allow RNA synthesis is not well understood.
The assembly of infectious coronavirus particles requires the selection of viral genomic RNA from a cellular pool that contains an abundant excess of non-viral and viral RNAs.
Among the seven to ten specific viral mRNAs synthesized in virus-infected cells, only the full-length genomic RNA is packaged efficiently into coronavirus particles.
Studies have revealed cis-acting elements and trans-acting viral factors involved in the coronavirus genome encapsidation and packaging.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of genome selection and packaging is critical for developing antiviral strategies and viral expression vectors based on the coronavirus genome.
Misinformation related to the 2019–2020 coronavirus outbreak
SARS conspiracy theory
The 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic is an ongoing global pandemic of  coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by  severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
The outbreak was first identified in Wuhan, Hubei, China, in December 2019, and was recognised as a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on 11 March 2020.
As of 22 March, more than 335,000 cases of COVID-19 have been reported in over 190 countries and territories, resulting in more than 14,600 deaths  and 97,000 recoveries.The virus is typically spread from one person to another via respiratory droplets produced during coughing.
It may also be spread from touching contaminated surfaces and then touching one's face.
It is most contagious when people are symptomatic, although spread may be possible before symptoms appear.
The time between exposure and symptom onset is typically around five days, but may range from two to fourteen days.
Common symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Complications may include pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
There is no vaccine or specific antiviral treatment.
Primary treatment is symptomatic and supportive therapy.
Recommended preventive measures include hand washing, covering the mouth when coughing, maintaining distance from other people, and monitoring and self-isolation for people who suspect they are infected.Efforts to prevent the virus spreading include travel restrictions, quarantines, curfews, event postponements and cancellations, and facility closures.
These include a quarantine of Hubei, nationwide quarantines in Italy and elsewhere in Europe, curfew measures elsewhere in China and South Korea, various border closures or incoming passenger restrictions, screening at airports and train stations, and travel advisories regarding regions with community transmission.
Schools and universities have closed either on a nationwide or local basis in over 124 countries, affecting more than 1.2 billion students.The pandemic has led to global socioeconomic disruption, the postponement or cancellation of sporting, religious and cultural events, and widespread fears of supply shortages which have spurred panic buying.
Misinformation and conspiracy theories about the virus have spread online, and there have been incidents of xenophobia and racism against Chinese and other East or Southeast Asian people.
Health authorities in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province, China, reported a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown cause on 31 December 2019, and an investigation was launched in early January 2020.
The cases mostly had links to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market and so the virus is thought to have a zoonotic origin.
The virus that caused the outbreak is known as SARS-CoV-2, a newly discovered virus closely related to bat coronaviruses, pangolin coronaviruses and SARS-CoV.The earliest person with symptoms was traced back to 1 December 2019, someone who did not have connections with the later cluster linked to the wet market.
Of the early cluster of cases reported in December 2019, two-thirds were found to have a link with the market.
On 14 March 2020, an unverified report from the South China Morning Post said that a 55-year-old from Hubei province could have been the first person who contracted the disease, on 17 November.On 26 February 2020, the WHO reported that, as new cases reportedly dropped in China but suddenly increased in Italy, Iran, and South Korea, the number of new cases outside China had exceeded the number of new cases in China for the first time.
There may be substantial under-reporting of cases, particularly those with milder symptoms.
By 26 February, relatively few cases have been reported among youth, with those 19 and under making up 2.4% of cases worldwide.Government sources in Germany and the UK estimate that 60–70% of the population will need to become infected before effective herd immunity can be achieved.
The crude mortality ratio (reported deaths divided by reported cases) is 3 to 4%, according to the World Health Organization, as of 6 March 2020.
The reported rate varies by country, age, and other health problems.The time from development of symptoms to death has been between six and 41 days, with a median of 14 days.
By 21 March more than 11,400 deaths had been attributed to COVID-19.
Most of those who have died were elderly—about 80% of deaths were in those over 60, and 75% had pre-existing health conditions including cardiovascular diseases and diabetes.
The first confirmed death was on 9 January 2020 in Wuhan.
The first death outside China occurred on 1 February in the Philippines, and the first death outside Asia was in France on 14 February.
By 28 February, outside mainland China, more than a dozen deaths each were recorded in Iran, South Korea, and Italy.
By 13 March, over 40 countries and territories had reported deaths, on every continent except Antarctica.
Symptoms of COVID-19 are non-specific and those infected may either be asymptomatic or develop flu-like symptoms such as fever, cough, fatigue, shortness of breath, or muscle pain.
The typical signs and symptoms and their prevalence are shown in the corresponding table.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) lists emergency symptoms including difficulty breathing, persistent chest pain or pressure, sudden confusion, difficulty waking, and bluish face or lips; immediate medical attention is advised if these symptoms are present.Further development of the disease can lead to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, septic shock and death.
Some of those infected may be asymptomatic, returning test results that confirm infection but show no clinical symptoms, so researchers have issued advice that those with close contact to confirmed infected people should be closely monitored and examined to rule out infection.
Chinese estimates of the asymptomatic ratio range from few to 44%.The usual incubation period (the time between infection and symptom onset) ranges from one to fourteen days; it is most commonly five days.
In one case, it may have had an incubation period of 27 days.
According to the WHO, the primary mode of transmission is via respiratory droplets that people cough or exhale.
According to the CDC, it is thought to spread when people are in close contact, via these droplets, often during coughing or sneezing.
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) concurs that it seems to spread via these droplets, during coughing, sneezing or exhaling, but "[t]here is not enough epidemiological information at this time [21 March] to determine how easily and sustainably this virus spreads between people."
The stability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in the air and on various surfaces is believed to be comparable to that of other coronaviruses.
A single study of how long SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) remains infectious on various surfaces, "show[s] that when the virus is carried by the droplets released when someone coughs or sneezes, it remains viable, or able to still infect people, in aerosols for at least three hours."They also tested SARS-CoV-2 on plastic, stainless steel, copper, and cardboard, and found that although SARS-CoV-2 decayed exponentially over time in all five environments they tested, the virus was viable for infection for up to three days on plastic and stainless steel, for one day on cardboard, and for up to four hours on copper.A survey of research on the inactivation of other coronaviruses using various biocidal agents suggests that disinfecting surfaces contaminated with SARS-CoV-2 may also be achieved using similar solutions (within one minute of exposure on a stainless steel surface), including 62–71% ethanol, 50–100% isopropanol, 0.1% sodium hypochlorite, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide, and 0.2–7.5% povidone-iodine; benzalkonium chloride and chlorhexidine gluconate are less effective.The WHO has stated that the risk of spread from someone without symptoms is "very low".
However, if someone has early symptoms and a mild cough, there is a risk of transmission.
An analysis of infections in Singapore and Tianjin, China revealed that coronavirus infections may be spread by people who have recently caught the virus and have not yet begun to show symptoms, unlike other coronaviruses such as SARS.Estimates of the basic reproduction number (the average number of people an infected person is likely to infect) range from 2.13 to 4.82.
This is similar to the measure typical of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV).
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, first isolated from three people with pneumonia connected to the cluster of acute respiratory illness cases in Wuhan.
All features of the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus occur in related coronaviruses in nature.SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to the original SARS-CoV.
It is thought to have a zoonotic origin.
Genetic analysis has revealed that the coronavirus genetically clusters with the genus Betacoronavirus, in subgenus Sarbecovirus (lineage B) together with two bat-derived strains.
It is 96% identical at the whole genome level to other bat coronavirus samples (BatCov RaTG13).
In February 2020, Chinese researchers found that there is only one amino acid difference in certain parts of the genome sequences between the viruses from pangolins and those from humans, however, whole genome comparison to date found at most 92% of genetic material shared between pangolin coronavirus and SARS-CoV-2, which is insufficient to prove pangolins to be the  intermediate host.
Infection by the virus can be provisionally diagnosed on the basis of symptoms, though confirmation is ultimately by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) of infected secretions (71% sensitivity) and CT imaging (98% sensitivity).
The WHO has published several RNA testing protocols for SARS-CoV-2, with the first issued on 17 January.
Testing uses real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR).
The test can be done on respiratory or blood samples.
Results are generally available within a few hours to days.A person is considered at risk if they have travelled to an area with ongoing community transmission within the previous 14 days, or have had close contact with an infected person.
Common key indicators include fever, coughing and shortness of breath.
Other possible indicators include fatigue, myalgia, anorexia, sputum production and sore throat.
Characteristic imaging features on radiographs and computed tomography have been described in a limited case series.
The Italian Radiological Society is compiling an international online database of imaging findings for confirmed cases.
Due to overlap with other infections such as adenovirus, imaging without confirmation by PCR is of limited use in identifying COVID-19.
Strategies for preventing transmission of the disease include overall good personal hygiene, hand washing, avoiding touching the eyes, nose or mouth with unwashed hands, coughing/sneezing into a tissue and putting the tissue directly into a dustbin.
Those who may already have the infection have been advised to wear a surgical mask in public.
Social distancing measures are also recommended to prevent transmission.Many governments have restricted or advised against all non-essential travel to and from countries and areas affected by the outbreak.
However, the virus has reached the stage of community spread in large parts of the world.
This means that the virus is spreading within communities whose members have not travelled to areas with widespread transmission.Health care providers taking care of someone who may be infected are recommended to use standard precautions, contact precautions and airborne precautions with eye protection.Contact tracing is an important method for health authorities to determine the source of an infection and to prevent further transmission.
Misconceptions are circulating about how to prevent infection, for example: rinsing the nose and gargling with mouthwash are not effective.
As of 13 March 2020, there is no COVID-19 vaccine, though a number of organizations are working to develop one.
Hand washing is recommended to prevent the spread of the disease.
The CDC recommends that people wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the toilet or when hands are visibly dirty; before eating; and after blowing one's nose, coughing, or sneezing.
It further recommended using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol by volume when soap and water are not readily available.
The WHO advises people to avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
Health organizations recommended that people cover their mouth and nose with a bent elbow or a tissue when coughing or sneezing (the tissue should then be disposed of immediately).
Surgical masks are recommended for those who may be infected, as wearing a mask can limit the volume and travel distance of expiratory droplets dispersed when talking, sneezing and coughing.
The WHO has issued instructions on when and how to use masks.Masks have also been recommended for use by those taking care of someone who may have the disease.
WHO has recommended the wearing of masks by healthy people only if they are at high risk, such as those who are caring for a person with COVID-19, although masks may help people avoid touching their faces.Surgical masks are the lowest grade of protection and are designed mainly to protect others from the wearer.
Masks designed to protect the wearer are technically "respirators", though calling them "masks" is common.China has specifically recommended the use of masks by healthy members of the public.
Hong Kong recommends wearing a surgical mask when taking public transport or staying in crowded places.
Thailand's health officials are encouraging people to make face masks at home out of cloth and wash them daily.
The Czech Republic banned going out in public without wearing a mask or covering one's nose and mouth.
Face masks have also been widely used by healthy people in Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Hong Kong.
Social distancing includes infection control actions intended to slow the spread of disease by minimizing close contact between individuals.
Methods include quarantines; travel restrictions; and the closing of schools, workplaces, stadiums, theatres, or shopping centres.
Individuals may apply social distancing methods by staying at home, limiting travel, avoiding crowded areas, using no-contact greetings, and physically distancing themselves from others.
Many governments are now mandating or recommending social distancing in regions affected by the outbreak.Older adults and those with underlying medical conditions such as diabetes, heart disease, respiratory disease, hypertension, and compromised immune systems face increased risk of serious illness and complications and have been advised by the US CDC to stay home as much as possible in areas of community outbreak.
Self-isolation at home has been recommended for those diagnosed with COVID-19 and those who suspect they have been infected.
Health agencies have issued detailed instructions for proper self-isolation.Additionally, many governments have mandated or recommended self-quarantine for entire populations living in affected areas.
The strongest self-quarantine instructions have been issued to those in high risk groups.
Those who may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19 and those who have recently travelled to a country with widespread transmission have been advised to self-quarantine for 14 days from the time of last possible exposure.
There are a number of strategies in the control of an outbreak: containment, mitigation, and suppression.
Containment is undertaken in the early stages of the outbreak and aims to trace and isolate those infected as well as other measures of infection control and vaccinations to stop the disease from spreading to the rest of the population.
When it is no longer possible to contain the spread of the disease, efforts then move to the mitigation stage, when measures are taken to slow the spread and mitigate its effects on the health care system and society.
A combination of both containment and mitigation measures may be undertaken at the same time.
Suppression requires more extreme measures so as to reverse the pandemic by reducing the basic reproduction number to less than 1.Part of managing an infectious disease outbreak is trying to decrease the epidemic peak, known as flattening the epidemic curve.
This decreases the risk of health services being overwhelmed and provides more time for vaccines and treatments to be developed.
Non-pharmaceutical interventions that may manage the outbreak include personal preventive measures, such as hand hygiene, wearing face-masks and self-quarantine; community measures aimed at social distancing such as closing schools and cancelling mass gathering events; community engagement to encourage acceptance and participation in such interventions; as well as environmental measures such surface cleaning.More drastic actions aim at suppressing the outbreak were taken in China once the severity of the outbreak became apparent, such as quarantining entire cities affecting 60 million individuals in Hubei, and strict travel bans.
Other countries adopted a variety of measures aimed at limiting the spread of the virus.
For example, South Korea introduced mass screening, localized quarantines, and issuing alerts on the movements of affected individuals.
Singapore provided financial support for those infected who quarantine themselves and imposed large fines for those who failed to do so.
Taiwan increased face-mask production and penalized hoarding of medical supplies.
Some countries require people to report flu-like symptoms to their doctor, especially if they have visited mainland China.Simulations for Great Britain and the US show that mitigation (slowing but not stopping epidemic spread), as well as suppression (reversing epidemic growth), has major challenges.
Optimal mitigation policies might reduce peak healthcare demand by 2/3 and deaths by half, still resulting in hundreds of thousands of deaths and health systems being overwhelmed.
Suppression can be preferred but need to be maintained until a vaccine becomes available (at least 18 months later) as transmission quickly rebounds when relaxed, while long-term intervention causes social and economic costs.
There are no specific antiviral medications approved for COVID-19, but development efforts are underway, including testing of existing medications.
Attempts to relieve the symptoms may include taking regular (over-the-counter) cold medications, drinking fluids, and resting.
Depending on the severity, oxygen therapy, intravenous fluids and breathing support may be required.
The use of steroids may worsen outcomes.
Several compounds, which were previously approved for treatment of other viral diseases, are being investigated.
Patient zero is the term used to describe the first-ever case of a disease.
There have been various theories as to where the "patient zero" case may have originated.
The first known case of the novel coronavirus was traced back to 1 December 2019 in Wuhan, Hubei, China.
A later unconfirmed claim, citing Chinese government documents, suggests that the first victim was a 55-year-old man who fell ill on 17 November 2019.[under discussion] Within the next month, the number of coronavirus cases in Hubei gradually increased to a couple of hundred, before rapidly increasing in January 2020.
On 31 December 2019, the virus had caused enough cases of unknown pneumonia to be reported to health authorities in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province, China, and an investigation into the illness began early in the following month.
These were mostly linked to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, which also sold live animals, consequently the virus is thought to have a zoonotic origin.During the early stages, the number of cases doubled approximately every seven and a half days.
In early and mid-January 2020, the virus spread to other Chinese provinces, helped by the Chinese New Year migration, with Wuhan being a transport hub and major rail interchange in China; infected people quickly spread throughout the country.
On 20 January, China reported nearly 140 new cases in a day, including two people in Beijing and one in Shenzhen.
Later official data shows that 6,174 people had already developed symptoms by 20 January 2020.On 30 January, the WHO declared the outbreak to be a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
On 24 February, its director, Tedros Adhanom, warned that the virus could become a global pandemic due to increasing numbers of cases outside China.On 11 March, the WHO officially declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a pandemic, following a period of sustained community-level transmission in multiple different regions of the world.
On 13 March, the WHO declared Europe to be the new centre of the pandemic after the rate of new cases in Europe surpassed those recorded in other regions of the world apart from China.
By 16 March 2020, the total number of cases reported around the world outside China had exceeded that of Mainland China.
On 19 March 2020, China reported no new domestic cases (excluding cases re-imported from abroad) for the first time since the outbreak, while the total number of deaths in Italy surpassed that of China.As of 22 March 2020, over 337,000 cases have been reported worldwide; more than 14,400 people have died; and over 96,000 have recovered.
More than 170 territories have had at least one case.
Due to the pandemic in Europe, multiple countries in the Schengen Area have restricted free movement and set up border controls.
National reactions have included containment measures such as quarantines and curfews.
As of 21 March, more than 250 million people are in lockdown in Europe  and more than 100 million people are in lockdown in the United States.
The first person known to have fallen ill due to the new virus was traced back to 1 December 2019 in Wuhan.
Doctor Zhang Jixian observed a cluster of unknown pneumonia on 26 December, and her hospital informed Wuhan Jianghan CDC on 27 December.
A public notice on the outbreak was released by Wuhan Municipal Health Commission on 31 December.
WHO was informed of the outbreak on the same day.
During the early stages of the outbreak there were concerns regarding the censorship of information related to the outbreak; Chinese National Health Commission initially said that they had no "clear evidence" of human-to-human transmissions.
The Chinese Communist Party launched a radical campaign described by the Party general secretary Xi Jinping as a "people's war" to contain the spread of the virus.
In what has been described as "the largest quarantine in human history", a quarantine was announced on 23 January stopping travel in and out of Wuhan, which was extended to a total of 15 cities in Hubei, affecting a total of about 57 million people.
Private vehicle use was banned in the city.
Chinese New Year (25 January) celebrations were cancelled in many places.
The authorities also announced the construction of a temporary hospital, Huoshenshan Hospital, which was completed in 10 days, and 14 temporary hospitals were constructed in China in total.On 26 January, the Communist Party and the government instituted further measures to contain the COVID-19 outbreak, including health declarations for travellers and changes to national holidays.
The leading group decided to extend the Spring Festival holiday to contain the outbreak.
Universities and schools around the country were also closed.
The regions of Hong Kong and Macau instituted several measures, particularly in regard to schools and universities.
Remote working measures were instituted in several Chinese regions.
Travel restrictions were enacted.
Other provinces and cities outside Hubei imposed travel restrictions.
Public transport was modified, and museums throughout China were temporarily closed.
Control of movement of people was applied in many cities, and it has been estimated that over half of China's population, around 760 million people, faced some forms of outdoor restriction.After the outbreak entered its global phase in March, many Chinese students studying in Europe and the United States have returned home as the domestic daily new cases in China declined.
Chinese authorities have taken strict measures to prevent the virus from "importing" from other countries.
For example, Beijing has imposed a 14-day mandatory quarantine for all international travellers entering the city.The early response by the Wuhan authorities was criticized as prioritizing a control of information—that might be unfavourable for local officials—over public safety, and the Chinese government was also criticized for cover-ups and downplaying the initial discovery and severity of the outbreak.
In early January 2020, Wuhan police summoned and "admonished" several doctors—including Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist at Wuhan Central Hospital—for "spreading rumours" likening the disease to SARS.
Li later died because of the virus.
Later in March, Wuhan police apologized to Li's family after National Supervisory Commission admitted the conduct of local officials was inadequate and acknowledged the whistleblower's effort on raising public awareness.
Observers have also blamed the institutional censorship that left the citizens and senior officials with inaccurate information on the outbreak and "contributed to a prolonged period of inaction that allowed the virus to spread".
Some experts doubted the accuracy of the number of cases reported by the Chinese government, which repeatedly changed how it counted coronavirus cases.
The Chinese government has also been accused of rejecting help from the US CDC and the WHO.Although criticisms have been levelled at the aggressive response of China to control the outbreak, China's actions have also been praised by some foreign leaders such as U.S. President Donald Trump, and Russian president Vladimir Putin.
Trump later reversed himself, saying "I wish they could have told us earlier about what was going on inside," adding that China "was very secretive, and that's unfortunate."
The director of WHO Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus congratulated Chinese government "for the extraordinary measures it has taken to contain the outbreak", and a later WHO report described China's response as "perhaps the most ambitious, agile and aggressive disease containment effort in history."
According to a media report on 16 March, the economy in China was very hard hit in the first two months of 2020 due to the measures taken by the government to curtail virus spread, and retail sales plunged 20.5%.
COVID-19 was confirmed to have spread to South Korea on 20 January 2020 from China.
There was a large increase in cases on 20 February, potentially attributable to a gathering in Daegu of a new religious movement known as the Shincheonji Church of Jesus.42 Chinese Shincheonji devotees visiting Daegu from Wuhan China were suspected by some as propagating the outbreak.
As of 22 February, among 9,336 followers of the church, 1,261 or about 13% reported symptoms.South Korea declared the highest level of alert on 23 February 2020.
On 28 February, over 2,000 confirmed cases were reported in Korea, rising to 3,150 on 29 February.
All South Korean military bases were on quarantine after tests confirmed that three soldiers were positive for the virus.
Airline schedules were also affected and therefore they were changed.South Korea introduced what was considered the largest and best-organised program in the world to screen the population for the virus, and isolate any infected people as well as tracing and quarantining those who contacted them.
Screening methods included a drive-thru testing for the virus with the results available the next day.
It is considered to be a success in controlling the outbreak despite not quarantining entire cities.The South Korean society was initially polarised with President Moon Jae-in's response to the crisis.
Many Koreans signed petitions either calling for the impeachment of Moon over what they claimed is the government's mishandling of the outbreak, or praising strongly his response.
Iran reported its first confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infections on 19 February in Qom, where, according to the Ministry of Health and Medical Education, two people had died later that day.
Early measures announced by the government included the cancellation of concerts and other cultural events, sporting events, and Friday prayers, universities, higher education institutions and schools.
Iran allocated five trillion rials to combat the virus.
President Hassan Rouhani said on 26 February 2020 that there were no plans to quarantine areas affected by the outbreak, and only individuals would be quarantined.
Plans to limit travel between cities were announced in March.
Shia shrines in Qom remained open to pilgrims until 16 March 2020.Iran became a centre of the spread of the virus after China.
Amidst claims of a cover-up of the extent of the outbreak in the country, over ten countries had traced their cases back to Iran by 28 February, indicating that the extent of the outbreak may be more severe than the 388 cases reported by the Iranian government by that date.
The Iranian Parliament was shut down, with 23 of its 290 members reported to have had tested positive for the virus on 3 March.
A number of senior government officials, as well as two members of the Parliament, have died from the disease.
On 15 March, the Iranian government reported 100 deaths in a single day, the most recorded since the outbreak began.
The outbreak was confirmed to have spread to Italy on 31 January, when two Chinese tourists tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 in Rome.
In response, the Italian government suspended all flights to and from China and declared a state of emergency.
On 31 January, the Italian Council of Ministers appointed Angelo Borrelli, head of the Civil Protection, as Special Commissioner for the COVID-19 Emergency.
An unassociated cluster of COVID-19 cases was later further detected starting with 16 confirmed cases in Lombardy on 21 February.On 22 February, the Council of Ministers announced a new decree-law to contain the outbreak, including quarantining more than 50,000 people from 11 different municipalities in northern Italy.
Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte said "In the outbreak areas, entry and exit will not be provided.
Suspension of work activities and sports events has already been ordered in those areas."On 4 March, the Italian government ordered the full closure of all schools and universities nationwide as Italy reached 100 deaths.
All major sporting events, including Serie A football matches, will be held behind closed doors until April.
On 9 March, all sport was suspended completely for at least one month.
On 11 March, Prime Minister Conte ordered stoppage of nearly all commercial activity except supermarkets and pharmacies.On 6 March, the Italian College of Anaesthesia, Analgesia, Resuscitation and Intensive Care (SIAARTI) published medical ethics recommendations regarding triage protocols that might be employed.As of 22 March 2020, there were 59,138 confirmed cases, 5,476 deaths and 7,024 recoveries in Italy.
On 19 March, Italy overtook China as the country with the most coronavirus-related deaths in the world after reporting 3,405 fatalities from the pandemic.
The first known case in the United States of COVID-19 was confirmed in the Pacific Northwest state of Washington on 20 January 2020, in a man who had returned from Wuhan on 15 January.
The White House Coronavirus Task Force was established on 29 January.
On 31 January, the Trump administration declared a public health emergency, and placed travel restrictions on entry for travellers from China.
After the first death in the United States was reported in Washington state on 29 February, its governor, Jay Inslee, declared a state of emergency, an action that was followed by other states.
Schools in the Seattle area cancelled classes on 3 March, and by mid-March, schools across the country were closing and most of the country's students were out of school.On 6 March, president Donald Trump signed the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, which provided $8.3 billion in emergency funding for federal agencies to respond to the outbreak.
Corporations imposed employee travel restrictions, cancelled conferences, and encouraged employees to work from home.
Sports events and seasons were cancelled.On 11 March, Trump announced travel restrictions for most of Europe (excluding the United Kingdom) for 30 days, effective 13 March, and on 14 March, he expanded the restrictions to include the United Kingdom and Ireland.
On 13 March, he declared a national emergency, which made federal funds available to respond to the crisis.
Beginning on 15 March, many businesses closed or reduced hours throughout the U.S. as a method to try to combat the virus.As of 22 March 2020, the epidemic was present in all 50 states, plus the District of Columbia.
The number of confirmed cases in the U.S. rose to 32,356, with 414 deaths.The White House has been criticized for downplaying the threat and controlling the messaging by directing health officials and scientists to coordinate public statements and publications related to the virus with the office of Vice President Mike Pence.
The UK response to the virus first emerged as one of the most relaxed of the affected countries, and until 18 March 2020, the British government did not impose any form of social distancing or mass quarantine measures on its citizens.
On 15 March, it was reported that the UK government would no longer test individuals self-isolating with mild symptoms of coronavirus, however, it would test individuals seeking hospital treatment for the virus and those in long-term care facilities.
On 16 March, Prime Minister Boris Johnson made an announcement advising against all non-essential travel and social contact, to include working from home where possible and avoiding venues such as pubs, restaurants and theatres.
The government imposed restrictions on 18 March which limited school attendance to only the children of those in selected professions, namely NHS employees, police and those vital to food supply.On 20 March, the government announced that all leisure establishments (pubs, gyms etc.) were to close as soon as possible, and promised to pay up to 80% of workers' wages, to a limit of £2,500 per month, to prevent unemployment in the crisis.
The government has received criticism for the perceived lack of pace and intensity in its response to concerns faced by the public.
Only 23% of British adults were strictly following the government's coronavirus advice, a poll has found.
An analysis of air travel patterns was used to map out and predict patterns of spread and was published in The Journal of Travel Medicine in mid-January 2020.
Based on information from the International Air Transport Association (2018), Bangkok, Hong Kong, Tokyo and Taipei had the largest volume of travellers from Wuhan.
Dubai, Sydney and Melbourne were also reported as popular destinations for people travelling from Wuhan.
Bali was reported as least able in terms of preparedness, while cities in Australia were considered most able.There have been international comments that the 2020 Olympics should be moved from Japan or postponed.
On 22 January, the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) announced that it would be moving the matches in the third round of the 2020 AFC Women's Olympic Qualifying Tournament from Wuhan to Nanjing, affecting the women's national team squads from Australia, China PR, Chinese Taipei and Thailand.
A few days later, the AFC announced that together with Football Federation Australia they would be moving the matches to Sydney.
The Asia-Pacific Olympic boxing qualifiers, which were originally set to be held in Wuhan from 3 to 14 February, were also cancelled and moved to Amman, Jordan to be held between 3 and 11 March.Australia released its Emergency Response Plan for Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) on 7 February.
It states that much is yet to be discovered about COVID-19, and that Australia will emphasize border control and communication in its response to the pandemic.
As a result of the outbreak, many countries and regions including most of the Schengen Area, Armenia, Australia, India, Iraq, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, New Zealand, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Vietnam, and the United States have imposed temporary entry bans on Chinese citizens or recent visitors to China, or have ceased issuing visas and reimposed visa requirements on Chinese citizens.
Samoa started refusing entry to its own citizens who had previously been to China, attracting widespread condemnation over the legality of the decision.The European Union rejected the idea of suspending the Schengen free travel zone and introducing border controls with Italy, which has been criticized by some European politicians.
After some EU member states announced complete closure of their national borders to foreign nationals, the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said that "Certain controls may be justified, but general travel bans are not seen as being the most effective by the World Health Organization."Saudi Arabia temporarily banned foreigners from entering Mecca and Medina, two of Islam's holiest pilgrimage sites, to prevent the spread of coronavirus.
The United States suspended travel from the Schengen Area and later the Common Travel Area.
Many countries then started closing their borders to virtually all non-citizens or non-residents in rapid succession, including India, Slovakia, Denmark, Poland, Lithuania, Oman, United Arab Emirates and Russia.
Owing to the effective quarantine of public transport in Wuhan and Hubei, several countries have planned to evacuate their citizens and diplomatic staff from the area, primarily through chartered flights of the home nation that have been provided clearance by Chinese authorities.
Canada, the United States, Japan, India, France, Australia, Sri Lanka, Germany and Thailand were among the first to plan the evacuation of their citizens.
Pakistan has said that it will not be evacuating any citizens from China.
On 7 February, Brazil evacuated 34 Brazilians or family members in addition to four Poles, a Chinese and an Indian citizen.
The citizens of Poland, China and India got off the plane in Poland, where the Brazilian plane made a stopover before following its route to Brazil.
Brazilian citizens who went to Wuhan were quarantined at a military base near Brasília.
On the same day, 215 Canadians (176 from the first plane, and 39 from a second plane chartered by the US government) were evacuated from Wuhan, China, to CFB Trenton to be quarantined for two weeks.On 11 February, another plane of Canadians (185) from Wuhan landed at CFB Trenton.
Australian authorities evacuated 277 citizens on 3 and 4 February to the Christmas Island Detention Centre which had been "repurposed" as a quarantine facility, where they remained for 14 days.
A New Zealand evacuation flight arrived at Auckland on 5 February; the passengers (including some from Australia and the Pacific) were quarantined in a naval base at Whangaparoa north of Auckland.
The United States announced that it would evacuate Americans aboard the cruise ship Diamond Princess.
On 21 February, a plane carrying 129 Canadian passengers evacuated from Diamond Princess landed in Trenton, Ontario.
The Indian government has scheduled its air force to evacuate its citizens from Iran.
On 5 February, the Chinese foreign ministry stated that 21 countries (including Belarus, Pakistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Egypt and Iran) had sent aid to China.
The US city of Pittsburgh announced plans to send medical aid to Wuhan, which is its sister city.
The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) also announced plans to provide help.
Some Chinese students at other American universities have also joined together to help send aid to virus-stricken parts of China, with a joint group in the Greater Chicago Area reportedly managing to send 50,000 N95 masks and 1,500 protection suits to hospitals in the Hubei province on 30 January.The humanitarian aid organization Direct Relief, in co-ordination with FedEx transportation and logistics support, sent 200,000 face masks along with other personal protective equipment, including gloves and gowns, by emergency airlift to the Wuhan Union Hospital who requested the supplies, by 30 January.
The Gates Foundation stated on 26 January that it would donate US$5 million in aid to support the response in China which will be aimed at assisting "emergency funds and corresponding technical support to help front-line responders".
On 5 February, Bill and Melinda Gates further announced a US$100 million donation to the WHO, who made an appeal for funding contributions to the international community the same day.
The donation will be used to fund vaccine research and treatment efforts along with protecting "at-risk populations in Africa and South Asia."Japan, in the process of coordinating a plane flight to Wuhan to pick up Japanese nationals in the city, promised that the plane will first carry into Wuhan aid supplies that Japanese foreign minister Toshimitsu Motegi stated will consist of "masks and protective suits for Chinese people as well as for Japanese nationals".
On 26 January the plane arrived in Wuhan, donating its supply of one million face masks to the city.
Also among the aid supplies were 20,000 protective suits for medical staff across Hubei donated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government.
On 28 January, the city of Mito donated 50,000 masks to its sister-city of Chongqing, and on 6 February, the city of Okayama sent 22,000 masks to Luoyang, its sister-city.
On 10 February, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) of Japan made a symbolic deduction of 5,000 yen from the March salary of every LDP parliamentarian, a total of 2 million yen, to donate to China, with the party's secretary-general, Toshihiro Nikai, stating that "For Japan, when it sees a virus outbreak in China, it is like seeing a relative or neighbour suffering.
Japanese people are willing to help China and hope the outbreak will pass as soon as possible."Other countries have also announced aid efforts.
Malaysia announced a donation of 18 million medical gloves to China.
The Philippine Red Cross also donated $1.4 million worth of Philippine-made face masks, which were shipped to Wuhan.
Turkey dispatched medical equipment, and Germany delivered various medical supplies including 10,000 Hazmat suits.
On 19 February the Singapore Red Cross announced that they will send $2.26 million worth of aid to China, consisting of protective material and training.In March 2020, China and Russia have sent medical supplies and experts to help Italy affected by the coronavirus outbreak.
The WHO has commended the efforts of Chinese authorities in managing and containing the epidemic, with Director-General Tedros Adhanom expressing "confidence in China's approach to controlling the epidemic" and calling for the public to "remain calm".
The WHO noted the contrast between the 2003 epidemic, where Chinese authorities were accused of secrecy that impeded prevention and containment efforts, and the current crisis where the central government "has provided regular updates to avoid panic ahead of Lunar New Year holidays."
On 23 January, in reaction to the central authorities' decision to implement a transportation ban in Wuhan, WHO representative Gauden Galea remarked that while it was "certainly not a recommendation the WHO has made," it was also "a very important indication of the commitment to contain the epidemic in the place where it is most concentrated" and called it "unprecedented in public health history."On 30 January, following confirmation of human-to-human transmission outside China and the increase in the number of cases in other countries, the WHO declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), the sixth PHEIC since the measure was first invoked during the 2009 swine flu pandemic.
Tedros clarified that the PHEIC, in this case, was "not a vote of no confidence in China," but because of the risk of global spread, especially to low- and middle-income countries without robust health systems.
In response to the implementations of travel restrictions, Tedros stated that "there is no reason for measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade" and that "WHO doesn't recommend limiting trade and movement."On 5 February, the WHO appealed to the global community for a $675 million contribution to fund strategic preparedness in low-income countries, citing the urgency to support those countries which "do not have the systems in place to detect people who have contracted the virus, even if it were to emerge."
Tedros further made statements declaring that "We are only as strong as our weakest link" and urged the international community to "invest today or pay more later."On 11 February, the WHO in a press conference established COVID-19 as the name of the disease.
On the same day, Tedros stated that UN Secretary-General António Guterres had agreed to provide the "power of the entire UN system in the response."
A UN Crisis Management Team was activated as a result, allowing co-ordination of the entire United Nations response, which the WHO states will allow them to "focus on the health response while the other agencies can bring their expertise to bear on the wider social, economic and developmental implications of the outbreak."
On 14 February, a WHO-led Joint Mission Team with China was activated to provide international and WHO experts to touch ground in China to assist in the domestic management and evaluate "the severity and the transmissibility of the disease" by hosting workshops and meetings with key national-level institutions to conduct field visits to assess the "impact of response activities at provincial and county levels, including urban and rural settings."On 25 February, the WHO declared that "the world should do more to prepare for a possible coronavirus pandemic," stating that while it was still too early to call it a pandemic, countries should nonetheless be "in a phase of preparedness."
In response to a developing outbreak in Iran, the WHO sent a Joint Mission Team there on the same day to assess the situation.On 28 February, WHO officials said that the coronavirus threat assessment at the global level would be raised from "high" to "very high," its highest level of alert and risk assessment.
Mike Ryan, executive director of WHO's health emergencies program, warned in a statement that "This is a reality check for every government on the planet: Wake up.
Get ready.
This virus may be on its way and you need to be ready," urging that the right response measures could help the world avoid "the worst of it."
Ryan further stated that the current data did not warrant public health officials to declare a global pandemic, saying that such a declaration would mean "we're essentially accepting that every human on the planet will be exposed to that virus."On 11 March, the WHO declared the coronavirus outbreak an official pandemic.
The Director-General said that WHO was "deeply concerned both by the alarming levels of spread and severity, and by the alarming levels of inaction."
Some political leaders have called the pandemic the most significant global crisis since World War II.
A number of provincial-level administrators of the Communist Party of China (CPC) were dismissed over their handling of the quarantine efforts in Central China, a sign of discontent with the political establishment's response to the outbreak in those regions.
Some experts believe this is likely in a move to protect Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping from people's anger over the coronavirus outbreak.The Italian government has criticised the European Union's lack of solidarity with coronavirus-affected Italy.The outbreak has prompted The Boston Globe to call for the US to adopt social policies common in other wealthy countries, including universal health care, universal child care, paid family leave, and higher levels of funding for public health.The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has been heavily affected by the virus.
Iran's President Hassan Rouhani wrote a public letter to world leaders asking for help, saying that his country doesn't have access to international markets due to the United States sanctions against Iran.
As of 20 March, more than 960 million children and youth are not attending school because of temporary or indefinite country wide school closures mandated by governments in an attempt to slow the spread of COVID-19. 105 countries have shut schools nationwide, affecting students who would normally attend pre-primary to upper-secondary classes.
15 countries have implemented localized school closures to prevent or contain COVID-19, affecting an additional 640 million school children and youth.Even when school closures are temporary, it carries high social and economic costs.
The disruptions they cause affect people across communities, but their impact is more severe for disadvantaged children and their families including interrupted learning, compromised nutrition, childcare problems and consequent economic cost to families who cannot work.In response to school closures caused by COVID-19, UNESCO recommended the use of distance learning programs and open educational applications and platforms that schools and teachers can use to reach learners remotely and limit the disruption of education.
The coronavirus outbreak has been attributed to several instances of supply shortages, stemming from: globally increased usage of equipment to fight the outbreaks, panic buying and disruption to factory and logistic operations.
The United States Food and Drug Administration has issued warnings about shortages to drugs and medical equipment due to increased consumer demand and supplier disruption.
Several localities, such as the United States, Italy, and Hong Kong, also witnessed panic buying that led to shelves being cleared of grocery essentials such as food, toilet paper and bottled water, inducing supply shortages.
The technology industry in particular has been warning about delays to shipments of electronic goods.
According to WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom, the demand for personal protection equipment has risen 100-fold and this demand has led to the increase in prices of up to twenty times the normal price and also induced delays on the supply of medical items for four to six months.
This has also caused a shortage of personal protective equipment worldwide, with the WHO warning that this will endanger health workers.In Australia the pandemic has provided a new opportunity for daigou shoppers to sell Australian product into China.
This activity has left locals without essential supplies.As mainland China is a major economy and a manufacturing hub, the viral outbreak has been seen to pose a major destabilizing threat to the global economy.
Agathe Demarais of the Economist Intelligence Unit has forecast that markets will remain volatile until a clearer image emerges on potential outcomes.
In January 2020, some analysts estimated that the economic fallout of the epidemic on global growth could surpass that of the SARS outbreak.
One estimate from an expert at Washington University in St. Louis gave a $300+ billion impact on the world's supply chain that could last up to two years.
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries reportedly "scrambled" after a steep decline in oil prices due to lower demand from China.
Global stock markets fell on 24 February due to a significant rise in the number of COVID-19 cases outside mainland China.
On 27 February, due to mounting worries about the coronavirus outbreak, various US stock indexes including the NASDAQ-100, the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Industrial Average, posted their sharpest falls since 2008, with the Dow falling 1,191 points, the largest one-day drop since the financial crisis of 2007–08.
All three indexes ended the week down more than 10%.
On 28 February, Scope Ratings GmbH affirmed China's sovereign credit rating, but maintained a Negative Outlook.
Stocks plunged again based on coronavirus fears, the largest fall being on 16 March 2020.
Many consider an economic recession to be likely.
Tourism is one of the worst affected sectors due to travel bans, closing of public places including travel attractions, and advise of governments against any travel all over the world.
As a consequence, numerous airlines have cancelled flights due to lower demand, including British Airways, China Eastern and Qantas, while British regional airline Flybe collapsed.
Several train stations and ferry ports have also been closed.
The epidemic coincided with the Chunyun, a major travel season associated with the Chinese New Year holiday.
A number of events involving large crowds were cancelled by national and regional governments, including annual New Year festivals, with private companies also independently closing their shops and tourist attractions such as Hong Kong Disneyland and Shanghai Disneyland.
Many Lunar New Year events and tourist attractions have been closed to prevent mass gatherings, including the Forbidden City in Beijing and traditional temple fairs.
In 24 of China's 31 provinces, municipalities and regions, authorities extended the New Year's holiday to 10 February, instructing most workplaces not to re-open until that date.
These regions represented 80% of the country's GDP and 90% of exports.
Hong Kong raised its infectious disease response level to the highest and declared an emergency, closing schools until March and cancelling its New Year celebrations.Despite the high prevalence of coronavirus cases in Northern Italy and the Wuhan region, and the ensuing high demand for food products, both areas have been spared from acute food shortages.
Effective measures by China and Italy against the hoarding and illicit trade of critical products have been carried out with success, avoiding acute food shortages that were anticipated in Europe as well as in North America.
Northern Italy with its significant agricultural production has not seen a large reduction, but prices may increase according to industry representatives.
Empty food shelves were only encountered temporarily, even in Wuhan city, while Chinese government officials released pork reserves to assure sufficient nourishment of the population.
Similar laws exist in Italy, that require food producers to keep reserves for such emergencies.
Due to the coronavirus outbreak's impact on travel and industry, many regions experienced a drop in air pollution.
The Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air reported that methods to contain the spread of coronavirus, such as quarantines and travel bans, resulted in a 25% reduction of carbon emission in China.
In the first month of lockdowns, China produced approximately 200 million fewer metric tons of carbon dioxide than the same period in 2019, due to the reduction in air traffic, oil refining, and coal consumption.
Between 1 January and 11 March 2020, the European Space Agency observed a marked decline in nitrous oxide emissions from cars, power plants and factories in the Po Valley region in northern Italy, coinciding with lockdowns in the region.
In Venice, the water in the canals cleared up and experienced an increased presence of fish and waterfowl; the Venice mayor's office clarified that the increase in water clarity was due to the settling of sediment that is disturbed by boat traffic and mentioned the decrease in air pollution along the waterways.Despite a temporary decline in global carbon emissions, the International Energy Agency warned that the economic turmoil caused by the coronavirus outbreak may prevent or delay companies from investing in green energy.
However, extended quarantine periods have boosted adoption of remote work policies.As a consequence of the unprecedented use of disposable face masks, significant numbers are entering the natural environment and in particular, to rivers and seawater.
In some cases, the masks have been washed onto beaches where they are accumulating.
This accumulation has been reported on beaches in Hong Kong and is expected to add to the worldwide burden of plastic waste and the detrimental effects of this waste to marine life.
Another recent and rapidly accelerating fallout of the disease is the cancellation of religious services, major events in sports, the film industry, and other societal events, such as music festivals and concerts, technology conferences, fashion shows and sports.The Vatican announced that Holy Week observances in Rome, which occur during the last week of the Christian penitential season of Lent, have been cancelled.
Many dioceses have recommended older Christians to stay at home rather than attending Mass on Sundays, which is usually required; some churches have made church services available via radio, online livestreaming or television while others are offering drive-in worship.
With the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rome closing its churches and chapels and St. Peter's Square emptied of Christian pilgrims, other religious bodies also cancelled services and limiting public gatherings in churches, mosque, synagogues and gurdwaras.
Iran's Health Ministry announced the cancellation of Friday prayers in areas affected by the outbreak and shrines were closed, while Saudi Arabia banned the entry of foreigner pilgrims as well as its residents to the holy sites in Mecca and Medina.The pandemic has caused, at the very least, the most significant disruption to the worldwide sporting calendar since the Second World War.
Most major sporting events scheduled to take place now or in the next few weeks have been either cancelled or postponed, including the 2019–20 UEFA Champions League, 2019–20 Premier League, UEFA Euro 2020, 2019–20 NBA season, and 2019–20 NHL season.
The outbreak has been a concern for the 2020 Summer Olympics which is scheduled to take place in Tokyo starting at the end of July.While casinos and other gaming venues worldwide have been closed and live poker tournaments have been either postponed or cancelled, gamblers moved online with many online gambling sites reporting doubling of their rate of new sign-ups.The entertainment industry has also been affected, with various music groups suspending or cancelling concert tours.
Many large theatres such as those on Broadway  also suspended all performances.
Some artists have explored ways to continue to produce and share work over the internet as an alternative to traditional live performance, such as live streaming concerts or creating web-based "festivals" for artists to perform, distribute and publicize their work.
The political, cultural, and socio-economic impacts of the pandemic may together cause major changes in human society.
They include the rise in remote work, localization of global supply chains, and increased political polarization.The pandemic has been claimed to be causing a "revolution in working from home" as major corporations have transitioned to telecommuting arrangements in order to slow the spread of the virus.
This effect has also been observed in the rise of online learning in higher education.
Additionally, there may also be a reduction in business travel and international conferences, with virtual substitutes replacing them.
A more widespread reversal of globalization has also been discussed, especially in regard to supply chains.
The German Economy Minister has supported localization of supply chains in reaction to the pandemic.
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, heightened prejudice, xenophobia and racism have been noted toward people of Chinese and other East Asian descent, as incidents of fear, suspicion and hostility have been observed in many countries, particularly in Europe, North America and the Asia-Pacific region.
Some countries in Africa saw rising anti-Chinese sentiment as well.
There has been support for the Chinese, both on and offline, towards those in virus-stricken areas, but many residents of Wuhan and Hubei have reported experiencing discrimination based on their regional origin.
Since the progression of the outbreak to new hot-spot countries, people from Italy, the center of Europe's coronavirus outbreak, have also been subjected to suspicion and xenophobia.Citizens in numerous countries, including Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, and South Korea, have signed petitions lobbying their government to ban Chinese people from entering their country.
In Japan, the hashtag #ChineseDontComeToJapan had been trending on Twitter.
Chinese people in the United Kingdom said they were facing increasing levels of racist abuse, with cases of assaults reported.
Protesters in Ukraine attacked buses carrying Ukrainian and foreign evacuees from Wuhan.
Students from Northeast India, which shares a border with China, who study in major Indian cities have reportedly experienced harassment related to the coronavirus outbreak.
The Bharatiya Janata Party's State unit president in West Bengal Dilip Ghosh stated that the Chinese had destroyed nature and "that's why the God took revenge against them."
The remarks were later condemned by the Chinese consulate in Kolkata, calling it "erroneous."
There were rumors in India that some Muslims who returned from Dubai refused to undergo coronavirus testing for religious reasons.
The news was then amplified by bloggers and some some social media channels, but it was later debunked and confirmed to be false.
Local authorities in Bolivia quarantined Japanese nationals despite them having no coronavirus-related symptoms.
In the Russian cities of Moscow and Yekaterinburg, Chinese nationals were targeted by quarantine enforcing campaigns, as well as police raids, which were condemned by human rights advocates as racial profiling.
The Chinese Embassy in Germany has acknowledged a rise in hostile cases against its citizens since the outbreak.
Children of Asian descent were ostracized and mocked over their origins in middle schools near Paris.
Many French-Vietnamese report also being subject to harassment since the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan.As the pandemic has progressed, there have also been isolated instances of prejudice against Westerners, particularly Western tourists accused of importing the disease.
Most notably, a post to the Twitter account of the Thai Health Minister, Anutin Charnvirakul, urged Thais to be "more careful of Westerners than Asians".
It claimed many Western tourists refused to wear masks and "dressed dirtily and never shower".
The post attracted negative feedback in Thailand and the UK and was quickly removed.
Mr Charnvirakulk claimed he was not responsible for it.On 30 January, the WHO's Emergency Committee issued a statement advising all countries to be mindful of the "principles of Article 3 of the IHR (the International Health Regulations)", which the WHO says is a caution against "actions that promote stigma or discrimination" when conducting national response measures to the outbreak.
Predicting the peak and ultimate duration of the outbreak, which may differ in different places, is uncertain.
Maciej Boni of Penn State University stated, "Left unchecked, infectious outbreaks typically plateau and then start to decline when the disease runs out of available hosts.
But it's almost impossible to make any sensible projection right now about when that will be".
Zhong Nanshan, the Chinese government's senior medical adviser, argued that WHO advice should be followed everywhere and that "If all countries could get mobilized, it could be over by June."
Justin Lessler of John Hopkins University stated "if we flatten the curve, it may peak in July or in August.
If we don't flatten the curve, it'd probably peak much sooner but in a very unpleasant way".Adam Kucharski of London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine stated that SARS-CoV-2 "is going to be circulating, potentially for a year or two, so we need to be thinking on those time scales ...
At the moment, it seems the only way to sustainably reduce transmission are really severe unsustainable measures.".
According to Kucharski, social distancing measures would need to be continued for the course of the outbreak, until a vaccine was developed, or until sufficient herd immunity is in place.
According to the Imperial College study led by Neil Ferguson, social distancing and other measures would be required "until a vaccine becomes available (potentially 18 months or more)".Return to pre-outbreak measures may be gradual according to Krutika Kuppalli of the Johns Hopkins University Center for Health Security, who stated, "Once things get better, we will have to take a step-wise approach toward letting up on these measures and see how things go to prevent things from getting worse again."William Schaffner of Vanderbilt University stated, "I think it's unlikely that this coronavirus—because it's so readily transmissible—will disappear completely" and "might turn into a seasonal disease, making a comeback every year".
The virulence of the comeback would depend on herd immunity and the extent of mutation.
Owing to the urgency of the epidemic, many scientific publishers made scientific papers related to the outbreak available with open access.
Some scientists chose to share their results quickly on preprint servers such as bioRxiv, while archivists created an open access database of over 5,000 papers about coronaviruses, which they downloaded from Sci-Hub.
In addition, the platform Outbreak Science Rapid PREreview was launched to perform rapid open peer review of preprints related to emerging outbreaks.Medical care providers, including intensivists and pulmonologists, involved in the Free Open Access Medicine movement rapidly compiled both disease information and treatment procedures in the Internet Book of Critical Care which was quickly circulated by institutions including Princeton and UPenn.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Allen Institute for AI has partnered with leading research groups to prepare and distribute a machine readable dataset named COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19) a free resource of over 29,000 scholarly articles, including over 13,000 with full text, about COVID-19 and the coronavirus family of viruses for use by the global research community.
Interactive computing games have also been used to help with "designing and identifying proteins that may be able to bind to and neutralize the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that it uses to invade host cells.
The scientists hope that players' creations will yield insights that will allow them to create an effective antiviral therapy for COVID-19."
Foldit is an online video game that challenges players to fold various proteins into shapes where they are stable: "Players—who can work alone or in teams—are using the game's puzzle system to develop new protein structures that can be tested by biochemists in the lab for use in antiviral drugs."
Folding@home, currently based at the Washington University School of Medicine, asked people to donate their CPU time for computational drug design and other types of molecular dynamics involving SARS-CoV-2.
Rosetta@home, run by the Baker laboratory at the University of Washington, has been used for the same purpose.
After the initial outbreak, conspiracy theories and misinformation spread online regarding the origin and scale of the COVID-19 coronavirus.
Various social media posts claimed the virus was a bio-weapon, a population control scheme, or the result of a spy operation.Facebook, Google and Twitter announced that they would take stringent measures against possible misinformation.
In a blog post, Facebook stated they would remove content flagged by leading global health organizations and local authorities that violates its content policy on misinformation leading to "physical harm."On 2 February, the WHO declared there was a "massive infodemic" accompanying the outbreak and response, citing an overabundance of reported information, accurate and false, about the virus that "makes it hard for people to find trustworthy sources and reliable guidance when they need it."
The WHO stated that the high demand for timely and trustworthy information has incentivized the creation of a direct WHO 24/7 myth-busting hotline where its communication and social media teams have been monitoring and responding to misinformation through its website and social media pages.
The WHO has specifically debunked as false some claims that have circulated on social media, including that a person can tell if they have the virus or not simply by holding their breath; that drinking lots of water will protect against the virus; and that that gargling salt water will prevent infection.
Propaganda in China is promoting a narrative that China's authoritarian system is uniquely capable of curbing the coronavirus and contrasts that with the chaotic response of the Western democracies.Taiwanese authorities accused the 50 Cent Party's internet trolls of spreading disinformation online to sow fear and panic among Taiwanese.
Conspiracy theories about COVID-19 being the CIA's creation to keep China down were all over the Chinese internet.
On 26 January, Chinese military news agency Xilu published an article claiming the virus was artificially combined by the United States to "precisely target Chinese people".
Zhao Lijian, a spokesman from China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, tweeted in March 2020 that the disease may have been introduced by members of the American Army who visited Wuhan in October 2019.
On 22 February, US officials said that they have discovered Russia-linked social media accounts deliberately promoting anti-American conspiracy theories, such as "waging economic war" on China, which was denied by Russia.
Trump's top economic adviser Larry Kudlow and some members of the United States Congress have been accused of giving misinformation about the coronavirus.Iranian cleric Seyyed Mohammad Saeedi accused President Trump of targeting Qom with coronavirus to fulfil his previous promise of retaliation against Iranian cultural sites.
Iranian researcher Ali Akbar Raefipour claimed that the coronavirus was part of a "hybrid warfare" program waged by the United States on Iran and China.
Iran's Press TV asserted that "Zionist elements developed a deadlier strain of coronavirus against Iran".
According to the Middle East Media Research Institute, numerous writers in the Arabic media have promoted the conspiracy theory that COVID-19 was deliberately created and spread by the United States, as "part of an economic and psychological war waged by the US against China with the aim of weakening it and presenting it as a backward country and a source of diseases".In a move which commentators consider state propaganda to deflect blame for poor handling of the epidemic, some officials, including a foreign ministry spokesman, as reported by the state news agency Xinhua, have protested at alleged "politicisation" of the outbreak by countries.
Possibly prompted by a press conference on 27 February where Zhong Nanshan, a prominent expert, said that "the coronavirus first appeared in China but may not have originated in China", individual officials have echoed Xinhua's claim that "The WHO has said many times that COVID-19 is a global phenomenon with its source still undetermined."
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
290 million students out of school due to COVID-19: UNESCO releases first global numbers and mobilizes response,   UNESCO.
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page.
For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
(March 2020).
"Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: A retrospective cohort study".
The Lancet.
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30566-3.
ISSN 0140-6736.
PMID 32171076.
Government health agencies
COVID-19 (Questions & Answers) by the World Health Organization
COVID-19 (Q&A) by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
COVID-19 by the China National Health Commission
COVID-19 (Q&A) by the Singapore Ministry of Health
COVID-19 (Q&A) by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (Q&A) by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Expert Tips on COVID-19 Best Practices videos by WHOData and maps
Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) situation reports by the World Health Organization (official numbers of confirmed cases by country)
WHO map of cases by country
Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases and historical data by Johns Hopkins University
Covid-19 latest news and resources by The BMJ
COVID-19 Resource Centre by The Lancet
Coronavirus Resource Hub by Cell Press
Coronavirus Observer based on Johns Hopkins University data
Google Scholar list of COVID-19 research resources, with links to research hubs by the CDC, NEJM, JAMA, The Lancet, Cell, The BMJ, Elsevier, OUP, Nature, Wiley, CUP, and medRxiv
World Travel Restrictions based on WFP data
Coronavirus disease 2019
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
The disease was first identified in 2019 in Wuhan, Central China, and has since spread globally, resulting in the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic.
Common symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Muscle pain, sputum production, diarrhea, and sore throat are less common.
While the majority of cases result in mild symptoms, some progress to severe pneumonia and multi-organ failure.
As of 20 March 2020, the rate of deaths per number of diagnosed cases is 4.1%; however, it ranges from 0.2% to 15% according to age group and other health problems.The virus is typically spread from one person to another via respiratory droplets produced during coughing.
It may also be spread from touching contaminated surfaces and then touching one's face.
Time from exposure to onset of symptoms is generally between two and 14 days, with an average of five days.
The standard method of diagnosis is by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) from a nasopharyngeal swab.
The infection can also be diagnosed from a combination of symptoms, risk factors and a chest CT scan showing features of pneumonia.Recommended measures to prevent infection include frequent hand washing, physical distancing (maintaining distance from others), and keeping hands away from the face.
The use of masks is recommended for those who suspect they have the virus and their caregivers, but not the general public.
There is no vaccine or specific antiviral treatment for COVID-19.
Management involves treatment of symptoms, supportive care, isolation, and experimental measures.The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the 2019–20 coronavirus outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) on 30 January 2020 and a pandemic on 11 March 2020.
Evidence of local transmission of the disease has been found in many countries across all six WHO regions.
Although those infected with the virus may be asymptomatic, many develop flu-like symptoms including fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Emergency symptoms include difficulty breathing, persistent chest pain or pressure, confusion, difficulty waking, and bluish face or lips; immediate medical attention is advised if these symptoms are present.
Less commonly, upper respiratory symptoms such as sneezing, runny nose, or sore throat may be seen.
Symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea have been observed in varying percentages among people in several studies, with percentages varying from 3% to 31% of cases depending on the study.
Some initial cases in China presented with only chest tightness and palpitations.
In some, the disease may progress to pneumonia, multi-organ failure, and death.As is common with infections, there is a delay from when a person is infected with the virus to when they develop symptoms, known as the incubation period.
The incubation period for COVID-19 is typically five to six days but may range from two to fourteen days.
The disease is caused by the virus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), previously referred to as the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
It is primarily spread between people via respiratory droplets from coughs and sneezes.
A study investigating the rate of decay of the virus found no live viruses after 4 h on copper, 24 h on cardboard, 72 h on stainless steel, and 72 h on plastic.
However, detection rates did not reach 100% and varied between surface type (limit of detection was 3.33×100.5 TCID50 per liter of air for aerosols, 100.5 TCID50 per milliliter of medium for plastic, steel, and cardboard, and 101.5 TCID50 per milliliter of medium for copper).
Estimation of the rate of decay with a Bayesian regression model suggests that viruses may live up to 18 h on copper, 55 h on cardboard, 90 h on stainless steel, and over 100 h on plastic.
The virus remained alive in aerosols throughout the time of the experiment (3 h).
The virus has also been found in faeces, and transmission through faeces is being researched.The lungs are the organs most affected by COVID-19 because the virus accesses host cells via the enzyme ACE2, which is most abundant in the type II alveolar cells of the lungs.
The virus uses a special surface glycoprotein called a "spike" (peplomer) to connect to ACE2 and enter the host cell.
The density of ACE2 in each tissue correlates with the severity of the disease in that tissue and some have suggested that decreasing ACE2 activity might be protective, though another view is that increasing ACE2 using Angiotensin II receptor blocker medications could be protective and that these hypotheses need to be tested.
As the alveolar disease progresses, respiratory failure might develop and death may follow.The virus also affects gastrointestinal organs as ACE2 is abundantly expressed in the glandular cells of gastric, duodenal and rectal epithelium as well as endothelial cells and enterocytes of the small intestine.
The virus has been found in the faeces of as many as 53% of hospitalised people and more anal swab positives have been found than oral swab positives in the later stages of infection.
Duration time of positive stool ranged from 1 to 12 days and 17% of people remained positive in stool after showing negative in respiratory samples indicating that the viral gastrointestinal infection and the potential fecal-oral transmission can last even after viral clearance in respiratory tract.
Reoccurrence of the virus has also been detected through anal swabs suggesting a shift from more oral positive during the early stages of the disease to more anal positive during later periods.The virus is thought to be natural and have an animal origin, through spillover infection.
It was first transmitted to humans in Wuhan, China, in November or December 2019, and the primary source of infection became human-to-human transmission by early January 2020.
The earliest known infection occurred on 17 November 2019 in Wuhan, China.
The WHO has published several testing protocols for the disease.
The standard method of testing is real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR).
The test can be done on respiratory samples obtained by various methods, including a nasopharyngeal swab or sputum sample.
Results are generally available within a few hours to two days.
Blood tests can be used, but these require two blood samples taken two weeks apart and the results have little immediate value.
Chinese scientists were able to isolate a strain of the coronavirus and publish the genetic sequence so that laboratories across the world could independently develop polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests to detect infection by the virus.
As of 26 February 2020, there were no antibody tests though efforts to develop them are ongoing.
The FDA approved the first point-of-care test on 21 March 2020 for use at the end of that month.Diagnostic guidelines released by Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University suggested methods for detecting infections based upon clinical features and epidemiological risk.
These involved identifying people who had at least two of the following symptoms in addition to a history of travel to Wuhan or contact with other infected people: fever, imaging features of pneumonia, normal or reduced white blood cell count, or reduced lymphocyte count.
A study published by a team at the Tongji Hospital in Wuhan on 26 February 2020 showed that a chest CT scan for COVID-19 has greater sensitivity (98%) than the polymerase chain reaction (71%).
False negative results may occur due to PCR kit failure, or due to either issues with the sample or issues performing the test.
False positive results are likely to be rare.One study in China found that CT scans showed ground-glass opacities in 56%, but 18% had no radiological findings.
Bilateral and peripheral ground glass opacities are the most typical CT findings, though they are non-specific.
Consolidation, linear opacities and reverse halo sign are other radiological findings.
Initially, the lesions are confined to one lung, but as the disease progresses, indications manifest in both lungs in 88% of so-called "late patients" in the study group (the subset for whom time between onset of symptoms and chest CT was 6–12 days).
Ground glass opacities are also a common feature in children's disease.
Because a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 is not expected to become available until 2021 at the earliest, a key part of managing the COVID-19 pandemic is trying to decrease the epidemic peak, known as flattening the epidemic curve through various measures seeking to reduce the rate of new infections.
Slowing the infection rate helps decrease the risk of health services being overwhelmed, allowing for better treatment of current cases, and provides more time for a vaccine and treatment to be developed.Preventive measures to reduce the chances of infection in locations with an outbreak of the disease are similar to those published for other coronaviruses: stay home, avoid travel and public activities, wash hands with soap and warm water often and for at least 20 seconds (proper hand hygiene and also the time it takes to sing "Happy Birthday to You" twice.), practice good respiratory hygiene and avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
The CDC recommends covering up the mouth and nose with a tissue during any cough or sneeze and coughing or sneezing into the inside of the elbow if no tissue is available.
They also recommend proper hand hygiene after any cough or sneeze.
Social distancing strategies aim to reduce contact of infected persons with large groups by closing schools and workplaces, restricting travel, and canceling mass gatherings.
Social distancing also includes that people stay 6 feet apart (about 1.80 meters), roughly the length of a full size bed/mattress.According to the WHO, the use of masks is only recommended if a person is coughing or sneezing or when one is taking care of someone with a suspected infection.
Some countries also recommend healthy individuals to wear face masks, particularly China, Hong Kong and Thailand.
Some health experts consider wearing non-medical-grade masks and other face coverings like scarves or bandanas a good way to prevent people from touching their mouths and noses, even if non-medical coverings would not protect against a direct sneeze or cough from an infected person.To prevent transmission of the virus, the CDC recommends that infected individuals stay home except to get medical care, call ahead before visiting a healthcare provider, wear a face mask when exposed to an individual or location of a suspected infection, cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue, regularly wash hands with soap and water and avoid sharing personal household items.
The CDC also recommends that individuals wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the toilet or when hands are visibly dirty, before eating and after blowing one's nose, coughing, or sneezing.
It further recommended using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, but only when soap and water are not readily available.
For remote areas where commercial hand sanitizers are not readily available, WHO suggested two formulations for the local production.
In both of these formulations the antimicrobial activity of ethanol or isopropanol is enhanced by low concentration of hydrogen peroxide while glycerol acts as a humectant.
The WHO advises individuals to avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
Spitting in public places also should be avoided.
People are managed with supportive care which may include fluid, oxygen support, and supporting other affected vital organs.
Steroids such as methylprednisolone are not recommended unless the disease is complicated by acute respiratory distress syndrome.CDC recommends that those who suspect they carry the virus wear a simple face mask.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been used to address the issue of respiratory failure, but its benefits are still under consideration.
While WHO does not oppose the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen for symptoms, some recommend paracetamol (acetaminophen) for first-line use.
While theoretical concerns have been raised about ACE inhibitors, as of 19 March 2020 these are not sufficient to justify stopping these medications.The WHO and Chinese National Health Commission have published recommendations for taking care of people who are hospitalised with COVID-19.
Intensivists and pulmonologists in the US have compiled treatment recommendations from various agencies into a free resource, the IBCC.
Management of people infected by the virus includes taking precautions while applying therapeutic manoeuvres, especially when performing procedures like intubation or hand ventilation that can generate aerosols.CDC outlines the specific personal protective equipment and the order in which healthcare providers should put it on when dealing with someone who may have COVID-19: 1) gown, 2) mask or respirator, 3) goggles or a face shield, 4) medical gloves.
Most cases of COVID-19 are not severe enough to require mechanical ventilation (artificial assistance to support breathing), but a percentage of cases do.
Some Canadian doctors recommend the use of invasive mechanical ventilation because this technique limits the spread of aerosolized transmission vectors.
Severe cases are most common in older adults (those older than 60 years and especially those older than 80 years).
Many developed countries do not have enough hospital beds per capita, which limits a health system's capacity to handle a sudden spike in the number of COVID-19 cases severe enough to require hospitalization.
This limited capacity is a significant driver of the need to flatten the curve (to keep the speed at which new cases occur and thus the number of people sick at one point in time lower).
One study in China found 5% were admitted to intensive care units, 2.3% needed mechanical support of ventilation, and 1.4% died.
An Italian startup employed 3D printing technology to produce valves for life-saving coronavirus treatment due to a broken supply chain of original manufacturing.
3D printed valves cost $1 instead of $11,000 and were ready overnight.
No medications are approved to treat the disease by the WHO although some are recommended by individual national medical authorities.
Research into potential treatments started in January 2020, and several antiviral drugs are in clinical trials.
Although new medications may take until 2021 to develop, several of the medications being tested are already approved for other uses, or are already in advanced testing.Antiviral medication may be tried in people with severe disease.
The WHO recommended volunteers take part in trials of the effectiveness and safety of potential treatments.
In February 2020, China launched a mobile app to deal with the disease outbreak.
Users are asked to enter their name and ID number.
The app is able to detect 'close contact' using surveillance data and therefore a potential risk of infection.
Every user can also check the status of three other users.
If a potential risk is detected, the app not only recommends self-quarantine, it also alerts local health officials.Big data analytics on cellphone data, facial recognition technology, mobile phone tracking and artificial intelligence are used to track infected people and people whom they contacted in South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore.
In March 2020, the Israeli government enabled security agencies to track mobile phone data of people supposed to have coronavirus.
The measure was taken to enforce quarantine and protect those who may come into contact with infected citizens.
Also in March 2020, Deutsche Telekom shared private cellphone data with the German federal government agency, Robert Koch Institute, in order to research and prevent the spread of the virus.
Russia deployed facial recognition technology to detect quarantine breakers.
Italian regional health commissioner Giulio Gallera said that "40% of people are continuing to move around anyway", as he is been informed by mobile phone operators.
Infected individuals may experience distress from quarantine, travel restrictions, side effects of treatment, or fear of the infection itself.
To address these concerns, the National Health Commission of China published a national guideline for psychological crisis intervention on 27 January 2020.
The severity of COVID-19 varies.
The disease may take a mild course with few or no symptoms, resembling other common upper respiratory diseases such as the common cold.
Mild cases typically recover within two weeks, while those with severe or critical disease may take three to six weeks to recover.
Among those who have died, the time from symptom onset to death has ranged from two to eight weeks.Children of all ages are susceptible to the disease, but are likely to have milder symptoms and a much lower chance of severe disease than adults; in those younger than 50 years, the risk of death is less than 0.5%, while in those older than 70 it is more than 8%.
Pregnant women are at particular risk for severe infection.In some people, COVID-19 may affect the lungs causing pneumonia.
In those most severely affected, COVID-19 may rapidly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) causing respiratory failure, septic shock, or multi-organ failure.
Complications associated with COVID-19 include sepsis, abnormal clotting, and damage to the heart, kidneys, and liver.
Clotting abnormalities, specifically an increase in prothrombin time, have been described in 6% of those admitted to hospital with COVID-19, while abnormal kidney function is seen in 4% of this group.
Liver injury as shown by blood markers of liver damage is frequently seen in severe cases.Some studies have found that the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) may be helpful in early screening for severe illness.Many of those who die of COVID-19 have preexisting conditions, including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease.
The Italian Istituto Superiore di Sanità reported that, out of over 2000 deaths from the disease in the country, 99.8% had at least one preexisting condition with the average person having 2.7.
According to the same report, the median time between onset of symptoms and death was eight days with a difference of one day between people who were being treated in an ICU compared to those who were not.
In a study of early cases, the median time from exhibiting initial symptoms to death was 14 days, with a full range of six to 41 days.
In a study by the National Health Commission (NHC) of China, men had a death rate of 2.8% while women had a death rate of 1.7%.
Histopathological examinations of post-mortem lung samples show diffuse alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates in both lungs.
Viral cytopathic changes were observed in the pneumocytes.
The lung picture resembled acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
In 11.8% of the deaths reported by the National Health Commission of China, heart damage was noted by elevated levels of troponin or cardiac arrest.Availability of medical resources and the socioeconomics of a region may also affect mortality.
Estimates of the mortality from the condition vary because of those regional differences, but also because of methodological difficulties.
The under-counting of mild cases can cause the mortality rate to be overestimated.
However, the time lag in death occurring can mean the mortality rate is underestimated.It is unknown if past infection provides effective and long-term immunity in people who recover from the disease.
Immunity is likely, based on the behaviour of other coronaviruses, but cases in which recovery from COVID-19 have been followed by positive tests for coronavirus at a later date have been reported.
It is unclear if these cases are the result of reinfection, relapse, or testing error.Concerns have been raised about long-term sequelae of the disease.
The Hong Kong Hospital Authority found a drop of 20% to 30% in lung capacity in some people who recovered from the disease, and lung scans suggested organ damage.
The case fatality rate (CFR) depends on the availability of healthcare, the typical age and health problems within the population, and the number of undiagnosed cases.
Preliminary research has yielded case fatality rate numbers between 2% and 3%; in January 2020 the WHO suggested that the case fatality rate was approximately 3%, and 2% in February 2020 in Hubei.
Other CFR numbers, which adjust for differences in time of confirmation, death or remission but are not peer reviewed, are respectively 7% and 33% for people in Wuhan 31 January.
An unreviewed preprint of 55 deaths noted that early estimates of mortality may be too high as asymptomatic infections are missed.
They estimated a mean infection fatality ratio (IFR, the mortality among infected) ranging from 0.8% to 0.9%.
A peer-reviewed article published on 19 March estimated the overall symptomatic case fatality risk as 1.4% (IQR 0.9–2.1%).
The outbreak in 2019–2020 has caused at least 328,275 confirmed infections and 14,366 deaths.The epidemic spreads faster where people are close together and/or travel to other areas.
Researchers found that travel restrictions can reduce the basic reproduction number from 2.35 to 1.05, allowing the epidemic to be manageable.An observational study of nine people found no vertical transmission from mother to the newborn.
Also, a descriptive study in Wuhan found no evidence of viral transmission through vaginal sex (from female to partner), but authors note that transmission during sex might occur through other routes.
The World Health Organization announced on 11 February 2020 that "COVID-19" would be the official name of the disease.
World Health Organization chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said "co" stands for "corona", "vi" for "virus" and "d" for "disease", while "19" was for the year, as the outbreak was first identified on 31 December 2019.
Tedros said the name had been chosen to avoid references to a specific geographical location (i.e. China), animal species, or group of people in line with international recommendations for naming aimed at preventing stigmatisation.While the disease is named COVID-19, the virus that causes it is named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 or SARS-CoV-2.
The virus was initially referred to as the 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
The WHO additionally uses "the COVID-19 virus" and "the virus responsible for COVID-19" in public communications.
Because of its key role in the transmission and progression of the disease, ACE2 has been the focus of a significant proportion of research and various therapeutic approaches have been suggested.
There is no available vaccine, but research into developing a vaccine has been undertaken by various agencies.
Previous work on SARS-CoV is being utilised because SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV both use the ACE2 receptor to enter human cells.
There are three vaccination strategies being investigated.
First, researchers aim to build a whole virus vaccine.
The use of such a virus, be it inactive or dead, aims to elicit a prompt immune response of the human body to a new infection with COVID-19.
A second strategy, subunit vaccines, aims to create a vaccine that sensitises the immune system to certain subunits of the virus.
In the case of SARS-CoV-2 such research focuses on the S-spike protein that helps the virus intrude the ACE2 enzyme receptor.
A third strategy is the nucleic acid vaccines (DNA or RNA vaccines, a novel technique for creating a vaccination).
Experimental vaccines from any of these strategies would have to be tested for safety and efficacy.On 16 March 2020, the first clinical trial of a vaccine started with four volunteers in Seattle.
The vaccine contains a harmless genetic code copied from the virus that causes the disease.One difficulty with vaccine development is that older people, who are more vulnerable to the disease, are often poorly vaccinated due to age-related degradation of the thymus.
Therefore, alternative methods will need to be developed to increase immunity in this population.
One method being considered is treatment with recombinant interleukin 7 which plays an extremely important role in the maturation and reproduction of lymphoid cells.
Using interleukin 7 along with vaccines can boost the immune system's response to infections and increase the growth of restoration cells, thus lowering the risk of death in older people.
Several existing antiviral medications are being looked at to treat COVID-19 and some are moving into clinical trials.
There is tentative evidence for remdesivir as of March 2020.
Remdesivir inhibits SARS-CoV-2 in vitro.
Phase 3 clinical trials are being conducted in the US, in China, and in Italy.Chloroquine, previously used to treat malaria, was being studied in China in February 2020, with positive preliminary results.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, with hydroxychloroquine proving to be more potent than chloroquine and with a more tolerable safety profile.
Preliminary results from a trial suggested that chloroquine is effective and safe in treating COVID-19 associated pneumonia, "improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course".
However, there are calls for more review of the research to date.
The Guangdong Provincial Department of Science and Technology and the Guangdong Provincial Health and Health Commission issued a report stating that chloroquine phosphate "improves the success rate of treatment and shortens the length of person's hospital stay" and recommended it for people diagnosed with mild, moderate and severe cases of novel coronavirus pneumonia.
On 17 March, the Italian Pharmaceutical Agency included chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in the list of drugs with positive preliminary results for treatment of COVID-19.
Korean and Chinese Health Authorities recommend the use of chloroquine.The Chinese 7th edition guidelines also include interferon, ribavirin, or umifenovir for use against COVID-19.
Teicoplanin appears to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 and the related MERS conaviruses and is viewed as a potential treatment for COVID-19.In 2020, a randomized controlled trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that lopinavir/ritonavir was ineffective in the treatment of severe illness caused by SARS-CoV-2 and did not lead to shorter hospital stays or better outcomes compared to standard care alone.
Nitazoxanide has been recommended for further in vivo study after demonstrating low concentration inhibition of SARS-CoV-2.Studies have demonstrated that initial spike protein priming by transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) is essential for entry of SARS-CoV-2 via interaction with the ACE2 receptor.
These findings suggest that the TMPRSS2 inhibitor camostat approved for use in Japan for inhibiting fibrosis in liver and kidney disease might constitute an effective off-label treatment.In February 2020, Favipiravir was being studied in China for experimental treatment of the emergent COVID-19 disease.
A study on 80 people comparing it to lopinavir/ritonavir found that it significantly reduced viral clearance time to 4 days, compared to 11 for the control group, and that 91.43% of the people had improved CT scans with few side effects.
On 17 March, Chinese officials suggested the drug had been effective in treating COVID in Wuhan and Shenzhen.Researchers reveal the crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease providing a start for the design of an improved α-ketoamide inhibitor.
Cytokine storm, a life-threatening medical condition, can be a complication in the later stages of severe COVID-19.
There is evidence that hydroxychloroquine has anti-cytokine storm properties.Tocilizumab has been included in treatment guidelines by China's National Health Commission after a small study was completed.
It is undergoing a phase 2 non randomized test at the national level in Italy after showing positive results in people with severe disease.
Combined with a serum ferritin blood test to identify cytokine storms, it is meant to counter such developments, which are thought to be the cause of death in some affected people.
The interleukin-6 receptor antagonist was approved by the FDA for treatment against cytokine release syndrome induced by a different cause, CAR T cell therapy, in 2017.
Using blood donations from people who have recovered from COVID-19 is being investigated.
This strategy was tried for SARS.
Using this mechanism of action, antibodies produced by the immune systems of those who have recovered are transferred to people who need them.
This is a nonvaccine method of immunization.
Other forms of passive antibody therapy, for example, using manufactured monoclonal antibodies, are in development.
Convalescent serum production could be increased for quicker deployment.
Contact tracing, inquiry opened immediately to identify and contact everyone who has been in close contact with an infected person and subsequent collection of further information about these contacts
Coronavirus diseases, a group of closely related syndromes
Li Wenliang, a doctor at Central Hospital of Wuhan and one of the first to warn others about the disease, from which he later died
Disease X, a World Health Organisation term
(March 2020).
"The origin, transmission and clinical therapies on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak - an update on the status".
Mil Med Res.
7 (1): 11.
doi:10.1186/s40779-020-00240-0.
PMC 7068984.
PMID 32169119.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak by the World Health Organization
Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) by the The Journal of the American Medical Association
Coronavirus: Latest news and resources by the BMJ Publishing Group
Novel Coronavirus Information Center by Elsevier
COVID-19 Resource Centre by The Lancet
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 by Nature
Coronavirus (Covid-19) by New England Journal of Medicine
Covid-19: Novel Coronavirus by Wiley Publishing
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), previously known by the provisional name 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus.
It is contagious in humans and is the cause of the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) that has been designated a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization (WHO).SARS-CoV-2 has close genetic similarity to bat coronaviruses, from which it likely originated.
An intermediate animal reservoir such as a pangolin is also thought to be involved in its introduction to humans.
From a taxonomic perspective, SARS-CoV-2 is classified as a strain of the species severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARSr-CoV).The strain was first discovered in Wuhan, China, so it has sometimes been referred to as the "Wuhan virus" or "Wuhan coronavirus".
Because the World Health Organization discourages the use of names based upon locations and to avoid confusion with the disease SARS, it sometimes refers to the virus as "the virus responsible for COVID-19" or "the COVID-19 virus" in public health communications.
Both the virus and the disease are often called "coronavirus" by the general public, but scientists and most journalists typically use more precise terms.
Human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been confirmed during the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic.
Transmission occurs primarily via respiratory droplets from coughs and sneezes within a range of about 2 metres (6 ft 7 in).
Indirect contact via contaminated surfaces is another possible cause of infection.
Preliminary research indicates that the virus may remain viable on plastic and steel for up to three days, but does not survive on cardboard for more than one day or on copper for more than four hours, and is inactivated by soap.
Viral RNA has also been found in stool samples from infected people.Whether the virus is infectious during the incubation period is uncertain.
On 1 February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) indicated that "transmission from asymptomatic cases is likely not a major driver of transmission".
However, an epidemiological model of the beginning of the outbreak in China suggested that "pre-symptomatic shedding may be typical among documented infections" and that subclinical infections may have been the source of a majority of infections.
The first known infections from the SARS-CoV-2 strain were discovered in Wuhan, China.
The original source of viral transmission to humans and when the strain became pathogenic remains unclear.
Research into the natural reservoir of the virus strain that caused the 2002–2004 SARS outbreak has resulted in the discovery of many SARS-like bat coronaviruses, most originating in the Rhinolophus genus of horseshoe bats, and two viral nucleic acid sequences found in samples taken from Rhinolophus sinicus show a resemblance of 80% to SARS-CoV-2.
A third viral nucleic acid sequence from Rhinolophus affinis, collected in Yunnan province and designated RaTG13, has a 96% resemblance to SARS-CoV-2.
The WHO considers bats the most likely natural reservoir of SARS-CoV-2, but differences between the bat coronavirus and SARS-CoV-2 suggest that humans were infected via an intermediate host.A metagenomic study published in 2019 previously revealed that SARS-CoV, the strain of the virus that causes SARS, was the most widely distributed coronavirus among a sample of Sunda pangolins.
On 7 February 2020, it was announced that researchers from Guangzhou had discovered a pangolin sample with a viral nucleic acid sequence "99% identical" to SARS-CoV-2.
When released, the results clarified that "the receptor-binding domain of the S protein of the newly discovered Pangolin-CoV is virtually identical to that of 2019-nCoV, with one amino acid difference."
Pangolins are protected under Chinese law, but their poaching and trading for use in traditional Chinese medicine remains common.Microbiologists and geneticists in Texas have independently found evidence of reassortment in coronaviruses suggesting involvement of pangolins in the origin of SARS-CoV-2.
However, pangolin coronaviruses found to date only share at most 92% of their whole genomes with SARS-CoV-2, making them less similar than RaTG13 to SARS-CoV-2.
This is insufficient to prove pangolins to be the intermediate host; in comparison, the SARS virus responsible for the 2002–2004 outbreak shared 99.8% of its genome with a known civet coronavirus.
SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the broad family of viruses known as coronaviruses.
It is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (+ssRNA) virus.
Other coronaviruses are capable of causing illnesses ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
It is the seventh known coronavirus to infect people, after 229E, NL63, OC43, HKU1, MERS-CoV, and the original SARS-CoV.Like the SARS-related coronavirus strain implicated in the 2003 SARS outbreak, SARS-CoV-2 is a member of the subgenus Sarbecovirus (beta-CoV lineage B).
Its RNA sequence is approximately 30,000 bases in length.
SARS-CoV-2 is unique among known betacoronaviruses in its incorporation of a polybasic cleavage site, a characteristic known to increase pathogenicity and transmissibility in other viruses.With a sufficient number of sequenced genomes, it is possible to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree of the mutation history of a family of viruses.
By 12 January 2020, five genomes of SARS-CoV-2 had been isolated from Wuhan and reported by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) and other institutions; the number of genomes increased to 42 by 30 January 2020.
A phylogenetic analysis of those samples showed they were "highly related with at most seven mutations relative to a common ancestor", implying that the first human infection occurred in November or December 2019.
As of 13 March 2020, 410 SARS-CoV-2 genomes sampled on five continents were publicly available.On 11 February 2020, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) announced that according to existing rules that compute hierarchical relationships among coronaviruses on the basis of five conserved sequences of nucleic acids, the differences between what was then called 2019-nCoV and the virus strain from the 2003 SARS outbreak were insufficient to make them separate viral species.
Therefore, they identified 2019-nCoV as a strain of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus.
Each SARS-CoV-2 virion is approximately 50–200 nanometres in diameter.
Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has four structural proteins, known as the S (spike), E (envelope), M (membrane), and N (nucleocapsid) proteins; the N protein holds the RNA genome, and the S, E, and M proteins together create the viral envelope.
The spike protein, which has been imaged at the atomic level using cryogenic electron microscopy, is the protein responsible for allowing the virus to attach to the membrane of a host cell.Protein modeling experiments on the spike protein of the virus soon suggested that SARS-CoV-2 has sufficient affinity to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors of human cells to use them as a mechanism of cell entry.
By 22 January 2020, a group in China working with the full virus genome and a group in the United States using reverse genetics methods independently and experimentally demonstrated that ACE2 could act as the receptor for SARS-CoV-2.
Studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2 has a higher affinity to human ACE2 than the original SARS virus strain.
SARS-CoV-2 may also use basigin to gain cell entry.Initial spike protein priming by transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) is essential for entry of SARS-CoV-2.
After a SARS-CoV-2 virion attaches to a target cell, the cell's protease TMPRSS2 cuts open the spike protein of the virus, exposing a fusion peptide.
The virion then releases RNA into the cell, forcing the cell to produce copies of the virus that are disseminated to infect more cells.
SARS-CoV-2 produces at least three virulence factors that promote shedding of new virions from host cells and inhibit immune response.
Based upon the low variability exhibited among known SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences, the strain is thought to have been detected by health authorities within weeks of its emergence among the human population in late 2019.
The earliest case of infection currently known is thought to have been found on 17 November 2019.
The virus subsequently spread to all provinces of China and to more than one hundred other countries in Asia, Europe, North America, South America, Africa, and Oceania.
Human-to-human transmission of the virus has been confirmed in all of these regions.
On 30 January 2020, SARS-CoV-2 was designated a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the WHO, and on 11 March 2020 the WHO declared it a pandemic.As of 22 March 2020 (18:45 UTC), there were 328,275 confirmed cases of infection, of which 81,397 were in mainland China.
While the proportion of infections that result in confirmed infection or progress to diagnosable disease remains unclear, one mathematical model estimated the number of people infected in Wuhan alone at 75,815 as of 25 January 2020, at a time when confirmed infections were far lower.
The total number of deaths attributed to the virus was 14,366 as of 22 March 2020 (18:45 UTC); 94,704 people had recovered from infection by that time.
Under a third of all deaths have occurred in Hubei province, where Wuhan is located.
Before 24 February 2020, the proportion was over 95%.The basic reproduction number (
R
0
{\displaystyle R_{0}}
) of the virus has been estimated to be between 1.4 and 3.9.
This means that each infection from the virus is expected to result in 1.4 to 3.9 new infections when no members of the community are immune and no preventive measures are taken.
"Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)".
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
11 February 2020.
"Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak".
World Health Organization (WHO).
"SARS-CoV-2 (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) Sequences".
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
"COVID-19 Resource Centre".
The Lancet.
"Coronavirus (Covid-19)".
The New England Journal of Medicine.
"Covid-19: Novel Coronavirus Content Free to Access".
Wiley.
"2019-nCoV Data Portal".
Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource.
Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus
Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), or EMC/2012 (HCoV-EMC/2012), is a species of coronavirus which infects humans, bats, and camels.
The infecting virus is an enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus which enters its host cell by binding to the DPP4 receptor.
The species is a member of the genus Betacoronavirus and subgenus Merbecovirus.Initially called 2012 novel coronavirus (2012-nCoV) or simply novel coronavirus (nCoV), it was first reported in 2012 after genome sequencing of a virus isolated from sputum samples from a person who fell ill in a 2012 outbreak of a new flu.
As of July 2015, MERS-CoV cases have been reported in over 21 countries, including Saudi Arabia,  Jordan, Qatar, Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Turkey, Oman, Algeria, Bangladesh, Indonesia (none were confirmed), Austria, the United Kingdom, South Korea, the United States,  Mainland China, Thailand, and  the Philippines.
MERS-CoV is one of several viruses identified by WHO as a likely cause of a future epidemic.
They list it for urgent research and development.
The virus MERS-CoV is a new member of the beta group of coronavirus, Betacoronavirus, lineage C.
MERS-CoV genomes are phylogenetically classified into two clades, clade A and B.
The earliest cases of MERS were of clade A clusters (EMC/2012 and Jordan-N3/2012), and new cases are genetically distinct (clade B).MERS-CoV is distinct from SARS coronavirus and distinct from the common-cold coronavirus and known endemic human betacoronaviruses HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1.
Until 23 May 2013, MERS-CoV had frequently been referred to as a SARS-like virus, or simply the novel coronavirus, and earlier it was referred to colloquially on messageboards as the "Saudi SARS".
Over 2,000 cases of MERS have been reported by 2017 with about 600 deaths, so the case fatality rate is <30%.
182 genomes have been sequenced by 2015 (94 from humans and 88 from dromedary camels).
All sequences are >99% similar.
The genomes can be divided into two clades - A and B - with the majority of cases being caused by clade B.
Human and camel strains are intermixed suggesting multiple transmission events.
The first confirmed case was reported in Saudi Arabia in 2012.
Egyptian virologist Dr. Ali Mohamed Zaki isolated and identified a previously unknown coronavirus from the man's lungs.
Dr. Zaki then posted his findings on 24 September 2012 on ProMED-mail.
The isolated cells showed cytopathic effects (CPE),  in the form of rounding and syncytia formation.A second case was found in September 2012, a 49-year-old male living in Qatar presented with similar flu symptoms, and a sequence of the virus was nearly identical to that of the first case.
In November 2012, similar cases appeared in Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Additional cases were noted, with deaths associated, and rapid research and monitoring of this novel coronavirus began.
It is not certain whether the infections are the result of a single zoonotic event with subsequent human-to-human transmission, or if the multiple geographic sites of infection represent multiple zoonotic events from an unknown common source.
A study by Ziad Memish of Riyadh University and colleagues suggests that the virus arose sometime between July 2007 and June 2012, with perhaps as many as 7 separate zoonotic transmissions.
Among animal reservoirs, CoV has a large genetic diversity yet the samples from patients suggest a similar genome, and therefore common source, though the data are limited.
It has been determined through molecular clock analysis, that viruses from the EMC/2012 and England/Qatar/2012 date to early 2011 suggesting that these cases are descended from a single zoonotic event.
It would appear the MERS-CoV has been circulating in the human population for greater than one year without detection and suggests independent transmission from an unknown source.
In humans, the virus has a strong tropism for nonciliated bronchial epithelial cells, and it has been shown to effectively evade the innate immune responses and antagonize interferon (IFN) production in these cells.
This tropism is unique in that most respiratory viruses target ciliated cells.Due to the clinical similarity between MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, it was proposed that they may use the same cellular receptor; the exopeptidase, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
However, it was later discovered that neutralization of ACE2 by recombinant antibodies does not prevent MERS-CoV infection.
Further research identified dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4; also known as CD26) as a functional cellular receptor for MERS-CoV.
Unlike other known coronavirus receptors, the enzymatic activity of DPP4 is not required for infection.
As would be expected, the amino acid sequence of DPP4 is highly conserved across species and is expressed in the human bronchial epithelium and kidneys.
Bat DPP4 genes appear to have been subject to a high degree of adaptive evolution as a response to coronavirus infections, so the lineage leading to MERS-CoV may have circulated in bat populations for a long period of time before being transmitted to people.
On 13 February 2013, the World Health Organization stated "the risk of sustained person-to-person transmission appears to be very low."
The cells MERS-CoV infects in the lungs only account for 20% of respiratory epithelial cells, so a large number of virions are likely needed to be inhaled to cause infection.Dr. Anthony S. Fauci of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, stated that as of now MERS-CoV "does not spread in a sustained person to person way at all."
Dr. Fauci stated that there is potential danger in that it is possible for the virus to mutate into a strain that does transmit from person to person.However, the infection of healthcare workers (HCW) has led to concerns of human to human transmission.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) list MERS as transmissible from human-to-human.
From their FAQ, in answer to the question "Does MERS-CoV spread from person to person?", they answer "MERS-CoV has been shown to spread between people who are in close contact.
Transmission from infected patients to healthcare personnel has also been observed.
Clusters of cases in several countries are being investigated."
There is also a New York Times article which provides some correlative context for this.However, on the 28th of May, the CDC revealed that the Illinois man who was originally thought to have been the first incidence of person to person spread (from the Indiana man at a business meeting), had in fact tested negative for MERS-CoV.
After completing additional and more definitive tests using a neutralising antibody assay, experts at the CDC have concluded that the Indiana patient did not spread the virus to the Illinois patient.
Tests concluded that the Illinois man had not been previously infected.
It is possible for silent MERS to occur, this is when the patient does not develop symptoms.
Early research has shown that up to 20% of cases show no signs of active infection but have MERS-CoV antibodies in their blood.
The virus appears to have originated in bats.
The virus itself has been isolated from a bat.
This virus is closely related to the Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 and Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5.
Serological evidence shows that these viruses have infected camels for at least 20 years.
The most recent common ancestor of several human strains has been dated to March 2012 (95% confidence interval December 2011 to June 2012).The evidence available to date suggests that the viruses have been present in bats for some time and had spread to camels by the mid 1990s.
The viruses appear to have spread from camels to humans in the early 2010s.
The original bat host species and the time of initial infection in this species has yet to be determined.
Examination of the sequences of 238 isolates suggested that this virus has evolved into three clades differing in codon usage, host, and geographic distribution.
Early research suggested the virus is related to one found in the Egyptian tomb bat.
In September 2012 Ron Fouchier speculated that the virus might have originated in bats.
Work by epidemiologist Ian Lipkin of Columbia University in New York showed that the virus isolated from a bat looked to be a match to the virus found in humans.
2c betacoronaviruses were detected in Nycteris bats in Ghana and Pipistrellus bats in Europe that are phylogenetically related to the MERS-CoV virus.
However the major natural reservoir where humans get the virus infection remained unknown until on 9 August 2013, a report in the journal The Lancet Infectious Diseases showed that 50 out of 50 (100%) blood serum from Omani camels and 15 of 105 (14%) from Spanish camels had protein-specific antibodies against the MERS-CoV spike protein.
Blood serum from European sheep, goats, cattle, and other camelids had no such antibodies.Soon after on 5 September 2013 a seroepidemiological study published in the journal of Eurosurveillance by R.A Perera et al. where they investigated 1343 human and 625 animal sera indicated, the abundant presence of MERS-CoV specific antibody in 108 out of 110 Egyptian dromedary camels but not in other animals such as goats, cows or sheep in this region.
These are the first and significant scientific reports that indicated the role of "dromedary camels" as a reservoir of MERS-CoV.
Recent work links camels to the virus.
An ahead-of-print dispatch for the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases records research showing the coronavirus infection in dromedary camel calves and adults, 99.9% matching to the genomes of human clade B MERS-CoV.At least one person who has fallen sick with MERS was known to have come into contact with camels or recently drank camel milk.Countries like Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates produce and consume large amounts of camel meat.
The possibility exists that African or Australian bats harbor the virus and transmit it to camels.
Imported camels from these regions might have carried the virus to the Middle East.In 2013 MERS-CoV was identified in three members of a dromedary camel herd held in a Qatar barn, which was linked to two confirmed human cases who have since recovered.
The presence of MERS-CoV in the camels was confirmed by the National Institute of Public Health and Environment (RIVM) of the Ministry of Health and the Erasmus Medical Center (WHO Collaborating Center), the Netherlands.
None of the camels showed any sign of disease when the samples were collected.
The Qatar Supreme Council of Health advised in November 2013 that people with underlying health conditions, such as heart disease, diabetes, kidney disease, respiratory disease, the immunosuppressed, and the elderly, avoid any close animal contacts when visiting farms and markets, and to practice good hygiene, such as washing hands.A further study on dromedary camels from Saudi Arabia published in December 2013 revealed the presence of MERS-CoV in 90% of the evaluated dromedary camels (310), suggesting that dromedary camels not only could be the main reservoir of MERS-CoV, but also the animal source of MERS.According to the 27 March 2014 MERS-CoV summary update, recent studies support that camels serve as the primary source of the MERS-CoV infecting humans, while bats may be the ultimate reservoir of the virus.
Evidence includes the frequency with which the virus has been found in camels to which human cases have been exposed, seriological data which shows widespread transmission in camels, and the similarity of the camel CoV to the human CoV.On 6 June 2014, the Arab News newspaper highlighted the latest research findings in the New England Journal of Medicine in which a 44-year-old Saudi man who kept a herd of nine camels died of MERS in November 2013.
His friends said they witnessed him applying a topical medicine to the nose of one of his ill camels—four of them reportedly sick with nasal discharge—seven days before he himself became stricken with MERS.
Researchers sequenced the virus found in one of the sick camels and the virus that killed the man, and found that their genomes were identical.
In that same article, the Arab News reported that as of 6 June 2014, there have been 689 cases of MERS reported within the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with 283 deaths.
MERS-CoV is more closely related to the bat coronaviruses HKU4 and HKU5 (lineage 2C) than it is to SARS-CoV (lineage 2B) (2, 9), sharing more than 90% sequence identity with their closest relationships, bat coronaviruses HKU4 and HKU5 and therefore considered to belong to the same species by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV).
Mnemonic:
Taxon identifier:
Scientific name: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Common name: MERS-CoV
Synonym: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Other names:
London1 novel CoV/2012
Human Coronavirus Erasmus Medical Center/2012 (HCoV-EMC/2012)
Rank:
› Group: IV; positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses
› Genus: Betacoronavirus› Species: Betacoronavirus 1 (commonly called Human coronavirus OC43), Human coronavirus HKU1, Murine coronavirus, Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5, Rousettus bat coronavirus HKU9, Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4, MERS-CoVVirus hosts:
Camels
BatsStrains:
Isolate:
Isolate:
NCBI
The virus grows readily on Vero cells and LLC-MK2 cells.The receptor for this virus is CD26 (dipeptidyl peptidase 4).
Saudi officials had not given permission for Dr. Zaki, the first isolator of the human strain, to send a sample of the virus to Fouchier and were angered when Fouchier claimed the patent on the full genetic sequence of the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus.The editor of The Economist observed, "Concern over security must not slow urgent work.
Studying a deadly virus is risky.
Not studying it is riskier."
Dr. Zaki was fired from his job at the hospital as a result of bypassing the Saudi Ministry of Health in his announcement and sharing his sample and findings.At their annual meeting of the World Health Assembly in May 2013, WHO chief Margaret Chan declared that intellectual property, or patents on strains of new virus, should not impede nations from protecting their citizens by limiting scientific investigations.
Deputy Health Minister Ziad Memish raised concerns that scientists who held the patent for the MERS-CoV virus would not allow other scientists to use patented material and were therefore delaying the development of diagnostic tests.
Erasmus MC responded that the patent application did not restrict public health research into MERS coronavirus, and that the virus and diagnostic tests were shipped—free of charge—to all that requested such reagents.
There are a number of mapping efforts focused on tracking MERS coronavirus.
On 2 May 2014, the Corona Map was launched to track the MERS coronavirus in realtime on the world map.
The data is officially reported by WHO or the Ministry of Health of the respective country.
HealthMap also tracks case reports with inclusion of news and social media as data sources as part of HealthMap MERS.
Lastly, South Korea was infected in mid-2015, with 38 deaths among 186 cases of infection.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Outbreak
Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4
Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations
Emergence of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
MERS-CoV Complete Genome
Molecular Illustration of MERS-Coronavirus
Philippines still MERS-CoV free – DOH
Deadly Middle East Coronavirus found in an Egyptian tomb bat
Coronavirus disease 2019
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
The disease was first identified in 2019 in Wuhan, Central China, and has since spread globally, resulting in the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic.
Common symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Muscle pain, sputum production, diarrhea, and sore throat are less common.
While the majority of cases result in mild symptoms, some progress to severe pneumonia and multi-organ failure.
As of 20 March 2020, the rate of deaths per number of diagnosed cases is 4.1%; however, it ranges from 0.2% to 15% according to age group and other health problems.The virus is typically spread from one person to another via respiratory droplets produced during coughing.
It may also be spread from touching contaminated surfaces and then touching one's face.
Time from exposure to onset of symptoms is generally between two and 14 days, with an average of five days.
The standard method of diagnosis is by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) from a nasopharyngeal swab.
The infection can also be diagnosed from a combination of symptoms, risk factors and a chest CT scan showing features of pneumonia.Recommended measures to prevent infection include frequent hand washing, physical distancing (maintaining distance from others), and keeping hands away from the face.
The use of masks is recommended for those who suspect they have the virus and their caregivers, but not the general public.
There is no vaccine or specific antiviral treatment for COVID-19.
Management involves treatment of symptoms, supportive care, isolation, and experimental measures.The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the 2019–20 coronavirus outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) on 30 January 2020 and a pandemic on 11 March 2020.
Evidence of local transmission of the disease has been found in many countries across all six WHO regions.
Although those infected with the virus may be asymptomatic, many develop flu-like symptoms including fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Emergency symptoms include difficulty breathing, persistent chest pain or pressure, confusion, difficulty waking, and bluish face or lips; immediate medical attention is advised if these symptoms are present.
Less commonly, upper respiratory symptoms such as sneezing, runny nose, or sore throat may be seen.
Symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea have been observed in varying percentages among people in several studies, with percentages varying from 3% to 31% of cases depending on the study.
Some initial cases in China presented with only chest tightness and palpitations.
In some, the disease may progress to pneumonia, multi-organ failure, and death.As is common with infections, there is a delay from when a person is infected with the virus to when they develop symptoms, known as the incubation period.
The incubation period for COVID-19 is typically five to six days but may range from two to fourteen days.
The disease is caused by the virus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), previously referred to as the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
It is primarily spread between people via respiratory droplets from coughs and sneezes.
A study investigating the rate of decay of the virus found no live viruses after 4 h on copper, 24 h on cardboard, 72 h on stainless steel, and 72 h on plastic.
However, detection rates did not reach 100% and varied between surface type (limit of detection was 3.33×100.5 TCID50 per liter of air for aerosols, 100.5 TCID50 per milliliter of medium for plastic, steel, and cardboard, and 101.5 TCID50 per milliliter of medium for copper).
Estimation of the rate of decay with a Bayesian regression model suggests that viruses may live up to 18 h on copper, 55 h on cardboard, 90 h on stainless steel, and over 100 h on plastic.
The virus remained alive in aerosols throughout the time of the experiment (3 h).
The virus has also been found in faeces, and transmission through faeces is being researched.The lungs are the organs most affected by COVID-19 because the virus accesses host cells via the enzyme ACE2, which is most abundant in the type II alveolar cells of the lungs.
The virus uses a special surface glycoprotein called a "spike" (peplomer) to connect to ACE2 and enter the host cell.
The density of ACE2 in each tissue correlates with the severity of the disease in that tissue and some have suggested that decreasing ACE2 activity might be protective, though another view is that increasing ACE2 using Angiotensin II receptor blocker medications could be protective and that these hypotheses need to be tested.
As the alveolar disease progresses, respiratory failure might develop and death may follow.The virus also affects gastrointestinal organs as ACE2 is abundantly expressed in the glandular cells of gastric, duodenal and rectal epithelium as well as endothelial cells and enterocytes of the small intestine.
The virus has been found in the faeces of as many as 53% of hospitalised people and more anal swab positives have been found than oral swab positives in the later stages of infection.
Duration time of positive stool ranged from 1 to 12 days and 17% of people remained positive in stool after showing negative in respiratory samples indicating that the viral gastrointestinal infection and the potential fecal-oral transmission can last even after viral clearance in respiratory tract.
Reoccurrence of the virus has also been detected through anal swabs suggesting a shift from more oral positive during the early stages of the disease to more anal positive during later periods.The virus is thought to be natural and have an animal origin, through spillover infection.
It was first transmitted to humans in Wuhan, China, in November or December 2019, and the primary source of infection became human-to-human transmission by early January 2020.
The earliest known infection occurred on 17 November 2019 in Wuhan, China.
The WHO has published several testing protocols for the disease.
The standard method of testing is real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR).
The test can be done on respiratory samples obtained by various methods, including a nasopharyngeal swab or sputum sample.
Results are generally available within a few hours to two days.
Blood tests can be used, but these require two blood samples taken two weeks apart and the results have little immediate value.
Chinese scientists were able to isolate a strain of the coronavirus and publish the genetic sequence so that laboratories across the world could independently develop polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests to detect infection by the virus.
As of 26 February 2020, there were no antibody tests though efforts to develop them are ongoing.
The FDA approved the first point-of-care test on 21 March 2020 for use at the end of that month.Diagnostic guidelines released by Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University suggested methods for detecting infections based upon clinical features and epidemiological risk.
These involved identifying people who had at least two of the following symptoms in addition to a history of travel to Wuhan or contact with other infected people: fever, imaging features of pneumonia, normal or reduced white blood cell count, or reduced lymphocyte count.
A study published by a team at the Tongji Hospital in Wuhan on 26 February 2020 showed that a chest CT scan for COVID-19 has greater sensitivity (98%) than the polymerase chain reaction (71%).
False negative results may occur due to PCR kit failure, or due to either issues with the sample or issues performing the test.
False positive results are likely to be rare.One study in China found that CT scans showed ground-glass opacities in 56%, but 18% had no radiological findings.
Bilateral and peripheral ground glass opacities are the most typical CT findings, though they are non-specific.
Consolidation, linear opacities and reverse halo sign are other radiological findings.
Initially, the lesions are confined to one lung, but as the disease progresses, indications manifest in both lungs in 88% of so-called "late patients" in the study group (the subset for whom time between onset of symptoms and chest CT was 6–12 days).
Ground glass opacities are also a common feature in children's disease.
Because a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 is not expected to become available until 2021 at the earliest, a key part of managing the COVID-19 pandemic is trying to decrease the epidemic peak, known as flattening the epidemic curve through various measures seeking to reduce the rate of new infections.
Slowing the infection rate helps decrease the risk of health services being overwhelmed, allowing for better treatment of current cases, and provides more time for a vaccine and treatment to be developed.Preventive measures to reduce the chances of infection in locations with an outbreak of the disease are similar to those published for other coronaviruses: stay home, avoid travel and public activities, wash hands with soap and warm water often and for at least 20 seconds (proper hand hygiene and also the time it takes to sing "Happy Birthday to You" twice.), practice good respiratory hygiene and avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
The CDC recommends covering up the mouth and nose with a tissue during any cough or sneeze and coughing or sneezing into the inside of the elbow if no tissue is available.
They also recommend proper hand hygiene after any cough or sneeze.
Social distancing strategies aim to reduce contact of infected persons with large groups by closing schools and workplaces, restricting travel, and canceling mass gatherings.
Social distancing also includes that people stay 6 feet apart (about 1.80 meters), roughly the length of a full size bed/mattress.According to the WHO, the use of masks is only recommended if a person is coughing or sneezing or when one is taking care of someone with a suspected infection.
Some countries also recommend healthy individuals to wear face masks, particularly China, Hong Kong and Thailand.
Some health experts consider wearing non-medical-grade masks and other face coverings like scarves or bandanas a good way to prevent people from touching their mouths and noses, even if non-medical coverings would not protect against a direct sneeze or cough from an infected person.To prevent transmission of the virus, the CDC recommends that infected individuals stay home except to get medical care, call ahead before visiting a healthcare provider, wear a face mask when exposed to an individual or location of a suspected infection, cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue, regularly wash hands with soap and water and avoid sharing personal household items.
The CDC also recommends that individuals wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the toilet or when hands are visibly dirty, before eating and after blowing one's nose, coughing, or sneezing.
It further recommended using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, but only when soap and water are not readily available.
For remote areas where commercial hand sanitizers are not readily available, WHO suggested two formulations for the local production.
In both of these formulations the antimicrobial activity of ethanol or isopropanol is enhanced by low concentration of hydrogen peroxide while glycerol acts as a humectant.
The WHO advises individuals to avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
Spitting in public places also should be avoided.
People are managed with supportive care which may include fluid, oxygen support, and supporting other affected vital organs.
Steroids such as methylprednisolone are not recommended unless the disease is complicated by acute respiratory distress syndrome.CDC recommends that those who suspect they carry the virus wear a simple face mask.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been used to address the issue of respiratory failure, but its benefits are still under consideration.
While WHO does not oppose the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen for symptoms, some recommend paracetamol (acetaminophen) for first-line use.
While theoretical concerns have been raised about ACE inhibitors, as of 19 March 2020 these are not sufficient to justify stopping these medications.The WHO and Chinese National Health Commission have published recommendations for taking care of people who are hospitalised with COVID-19.
Intensivists and pulmonologists in the US have compiled treatment recommendations from various agencies into a free resource, the IBCC.
Management of people infected by the virus includes taking precautions while applying therapeutic manoeuvres, especially when performing procedures like intubation or hand ventilation that can generate aerosols.CDC outlines the specific personal protective equipment and the order in which healthcare providers should put it on when dealing with someone who may have COVID-19: 1) gown, 2) mask or respirator, 3) goggles or a face shield, 4) medical gloves.
Most cases of COVID-19 are not severe enough to require mechanical ventilation (artificial assistance to support breathing), but a percentage of cases do.
Some Canadian doctors recommend the use of invasive mechanical ventilation because this technique limits the spread of aerosolized transmission vectors.
Severe cases are most common in older adults (those older than 60 years and especially those older than 80 years).
Many developed countries do not have enough hospital beds per capita, which limits a health system's capacity to handle a sudden spike in the number of COVID-19 cases severe enough to require hospitalization.
This limited capacity is a significant driver of the need to flatten the curve (to keep the speed at which new cases occur and thus the number of people sick at one point in time lower).
One study in China found 5% were admitted to intensive care units, 2.3% needed mechanical support of ventilation, and 1.4% died.
An Italian startup employed 3D printing technology to produce valves for life-saving coronavirus treatment due to a broken supply chain of original manufacturing.
3D printed valves cost $1 instead of $11,000 and were ready overnight.
No medications are approved to treat the disease by the WHO although some are recommended by individual national medical authorities.
Research into potential treatments started in January 2020, and several antiviral drugs are in clinical trials.
Although new medications may take until 2021 to develop, several of the medications being tested are already approved for other uses, or are already in advanced testing.Antiviral medication may be tried in people with severe disease.
The WHO recommended volunteers take part in trials of the effectiveness and safety of potential treatments.
In February 2020, China launched a mobile app to deal with the disease outbreak.
Users are asked to enter their name and ID number.
The app is able to detect 'close contact' using surveillance data and therefore a potential risk of infection.
Every user can also check the status of three other users.
If a potential risk is detected, the app not only recommends self-quarantine, it also alerts local health officials.Big data analytics on cellphone data, facial recognition technology, mobile phone tracking and artificial intelligence are used to track infected people and people whom they contacted in South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore.
In March 2020, the Israeli government enabled security agencies to track mobile phone data of people supposed to have coronavirus.
The measure was taken to enforce quarantine and protect those who may come into contact with infected citizens.
Also in March 2020, Deutsche Telekom shared private cellphone data with the German federal government agency, Robert Koch Institute, in order to research and prevent the spread of the virus.
Russia deployed facial recognition technology to detect quarantine breakers.
Italian regional health commissioner Giulio Gallera said that "40% of people are continuing to move around anyway", as he is been informed by mobile phone operators.
Infected individuals may experience distress from quarantine, travel restrictions, side effects of treatment, or fear of the infection itself.
To address these concerns, the National Health Commission of China published a national guideline for psychological crisis intervention on 27 January 2020.
The severity of COVID-19 varies.
The disease may take a mild course with few or no symptoms, resembling other common upper respiratory diseases such as the common cold.
Mild cases typically recover within two weeks, while those with severe or critical disease may take three to six weeks to recover.
Among those who have died, the time from symptom onset to death has ranged from two to eight weeks.Children of all ages are susceptible to the disease, but are likely to have milder symptoms and a much lower chance of severe disease than adults; in those younger than 50 years, the risk of death is less than 0.5%, while in those older than 70 it is more than 8%.
Pregnant women are at particular risk for severe infection.In some people, COVID-19 may affect the lungs causing pneumonia.
In those most severely affected, COVID-19 may rapidly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) causing respiratory failure, septic shock, or multi-organ failure.
Complications associated with COVID-19 include sepsis, abnormal clotting, and damage to the heart, kidneys, and liver.
Clotting abnormalities, specifically an increase in prothrombin time, have been described in 6% of those admitted to hospital with COVID-19, while abnormal kidney function is seen in 4% of this group.
Liver injury as shown by blood markers of liver damage is frequently seen in severe cases.Some studies have found that the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) may be helpful in early screening for severe illness.Many of those who die of COVID-19 have preexisting conditions, including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease.
The Italian Istituto Superiore di Sanità reported that, out of over 2000 deaths from the disease in the country, 99.8% had at least one preexisting condition with the average person having 2.7.
According to the same report, the median time between onset of symptoms and death was eight days with a difference of one day between people who were being treated in an ICU compared to those who were not.
In a study of early cases, the median time from exhibiting initial symptoms to death was 14 days, with a full range of six to 41 days.
In a study by the National Health Commission (NHC) of China, men had a death rate of 2.8% while women had a death rate of 1.7%.
Histopathological examinations of post-mortem lung samples show diffuse alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates in both lungs.
Viral cytopathic changes were observed in the pneumocytes.
The lung picture resembled acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
In 11.8% of the deaths reported by the National Health Commission of China, heart damage was noted by elevated levels of troponin or cardiac arrest.Availability of medical resources and the socioeconomics of a region may also affect mortality.
Estimates of the mortality from the condition vary because of those regional differences, but also because of methodological difficulties.
The under-counting of mild cases can cause the mortality rate to be overestimated.
However, the time lag in death occurring can mean the mortality rate is underestimated.It is unknown if past infection provides effective and long-term immunity in people who recover from the disease.
Immunity is likely, based on the behaviour of other coronaviruses, but cases in which recovery from COVID-19 have been followed by positive tests for coronavirus at a later date have been reported.
It is unclear if these cases are the result of reinfection, relapse, or testing error.Concerns have been raised about long-term sequelae of the disease.
The Hong Kong Hospital Authority found a drop of 20% to 30% in lung capacity in some people who recovered from the disease, and lung scans suggested organ damage.
The case fatality rate (CFR) depends on the availability of healthcare, the typical age and health problems within the population, and the number of undiagnosed cases.
Preliminary research has yielded case fatality rate numbers between 2% and 3%; in January 2020 the WHO suggested that the case fatality rate was approximately 3%, and 2% in February 2020 in Hubei.
Other CFR numbers, which adjust for differences in time of confirmation, death or remission but are not peer reviewed, are respectively 7% and 33% for people in Wuhan 31 January.
An unreviewed preprint of 55 deaths noted that early estimates of mortality may be too high as asymptomatic infections are missed.
They estimated a mean infection fatality ratio (IFR, the mortality among infected) ranging from 0.8% to 0.9%.
A peer-reviewed article published on 19 March estimated the overall symptomatic case fatality risk as 1.4% (IQR 0.9–2.1%).
The outbreak in 2019–2020 has caused at least 328,275 confirmed infections and 14,366 deaths.The epidemic spreads faster where people are close together and/or travel to other areas.
Researchers found that travel restrictions can reduce the basic reproduction number from 2.35 to 1.05, allowing the epidemic to be manageable.An observational study of nine people found no vertical transmission from mother to the newborn.
Also, a descriptive study in Wuhan found no evidence of viral transmission through vaginal sex (from female to partner), but authors note that transmission during sex might occur through other routes.
The World Health Organization announced on 11 February 2020 that "COVID-19" would be the official name of the disease.
World Health Organization chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said "co" stands for "corona", "vi" for "virus" and "d" for "disease", while "19" was for the year, as the outbreak was first identified on 31 December 2019.
Tedros said the name had been chosen to avoid references to a specific geographical location (i.e. China), animal species, or group of people in line with international recommendations for naming aimed at preventing stigmatisation.While the disease is named COVID-19, the virus that causes it is named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 or SARS-CoV-2.
The virus was initially referred to as the 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
The WHO additionally uses "the COVID-19 virus" and "the virus responsible for COVID-19" in public communications.
Because of its key role in the transmission and progression of the disease, ACE2 has been the focus of a significant proportion of research and various therapeutic approaches have been suggested.
There is no available vaccine, but research into developing a vaccine has been undertaken by various agencies.
Previous work on SARS-CoV is being utilised because SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV both use the ACE2 receptor to enter human cells.
There are three vaccination strategies being investigated.
First, researchers aim to build a whole virus vaccine.
The use of such a virus, be it inactive or dead, aims to elicit a prompt immune response of the human body to a new infection with COVID-19.
A second strategy, subunit vaccines, aims to create a vaccine that sensitises the immune system to certain subunits of the virus.
In the case of SARS-CoV-2 such research focuses on the S-spike protein that helps the virus intrude the ACE2 enzyme receptor.
A third strategy is the nucleic acid vaccines (DNA or RNA vaccines, a novel technique for creating a vaccination).
Experimental vaccines from any of these strategies would have to be tested for safety and efficacy.On 16 March 2020, the first clinical trial of a vaccine started with four volunteers in Seattle.
The vaccine contains a harmless genetic code copied from the virus that causes the disease.One difficulty with vaccine development is that older people, who are more vulnerable to the disease, are often poorly vaccinated due to age-related degradation of the thymus.
Therefore, alternative methods will need to be developed to increase immunity in this population.
One method being considered is treatment with recombinant interleukin 7 which plays an extremely important role in the maturation and reproduction of lymphoid cells.
Using interleukin 7 along with vaccines can boost the immune system's response to infections and increase the growth of restoration cells, thus lowering the risk of death in older people.
Several existing antiviral medications are being looked at to treat COVID-19 and some are moving into clinical trials.
There is tentative evidence for remdesivir as of March 2020.
Remdesivir inhibits SARS-CoV-2 in vitro.
Phase 3 clinical trials are being conducted in the US, in China, and in Italy.Chloroquine, previously used to treat malaria, was being studied in China in February 2020, with positive preliminary results.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, with hydroxychloroquine proving to be more potent than chloroquine and with a more tolerable safety profile.
Preliminary results from a trial suggested that chloroquine is effective and safe in treating COVID-19 associated pneumonia, "improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course".
However, there are calls for more review of the research to date.
The Guangdong Provincial Department of Science and Technology and the Guangdong Provincial Health and Health Commission issued a report stating that chloroquine phosphate "improves the success rate of treatment and shortens the length of person's hospital stay" and recommended it for people diagnosed with mild, moderate and severe cases of novel coronavirus pneumonia.
On 17 March, the Italian Pharmaceutical Agency included chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in the list of drugs with positive preliminary results for treatment of COVID-19.
Korean and Chinese Health Authorities recommend the use of chloroquine.The Chinese 7th edition guidelines also include interferon, ribavirin, or umifenovir for use against COVID-19.
Teicoplanin appears to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 and the related MERS conaviruses and is viewed as a potential treatment for COVID-19.In 2020, a randomized controlled trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that lopinavir/ritonavir was ineffective in the treatment of severe illness caused by SARS-CoV-2 and did not lead to shorter hospital stays or better outcomes compared to standard care alone.
Nitazoxanide has been recommended for further in vivo study after demonstrating low concentration inhibition of SARS-CoV-2.Studies have demonstrated that initial spike protein priming by transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) is essential for entry of SARS-CoV-2 via interaction with the ACE2 receptor.
These findings suggest that the TMPRSS2 inhibitor camostat approved for use in Japan for inhibiting fibrosis in liver and kidney disease might constitute an effective off-label treatment.In February 2020, Favipiravir was being studied in China for experimental treatment of the emergent COVID-19 disease.
A study on 80 people comparing it to lopinavir/ritonavir found that it significantly reduced viral clearance time to 4 days, compared to 11 for the control group, and that 91.43% of the people had improved CT scans with few side effects.
On 17 March, Chinese officials suggested the drug had been effective in treating COVID in Wuhan and Shenzhen.Researchers reveal the crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease providing a start for the design of an improved α-ketoamide inhibitor.
Cytokine storm, a life-threatening medical condition, can be a complication in the later stages of severe COVID-19.
There is evidence that hydroxychloroquine has anti-cytokine storm properties.Tocilizumab has been included in treatment guidelines by China's National Health Commission after a small study was completed.
It is undergoing a phase 2 non randomized test at the national level in Italy after showing positive results in people with severe disease.
Combined with a serum ferritin blood test to identify cytokine storms, it is meant to counter such developments, which are thought to be the cause of death in some affected people.
The interleukin-6 receptor antagonist was approved by the FDA for treatment against cytokine release syndrome induced by a different cause, CAR T cell therapy, in 2017.
Using blood donations from people who have recovered from COVID-19 is being investigated.
This strategy was tried for SARS.
Using this mechanism of action, antibodies produced by the immune systems of those who have recovered are transferred to people who need them.
This is a nonvaccine method of immunization.
Other forms of passive antibody therapy, for example, using manufactured monoclonal antibodies, are in development.
Convalescent serum production could be increased for quicker deployment.
Contact tracing, inquiry opened immediately to identify and contact everyone who has been in close contact with an infected person and subsequent collection of further information about these contacts
Coronavirus diseases, a group of closely related syndromes
Li Wenliang, a doctor at Central Hospital of Wuhan and one of the first to warn others about the disease, from which he later died
Disease X, a World Health Organisation term
(March 2020).
"The origin, transmission and clinical therapies on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak - an update on the status".
Mil Med Res.
7 (1): 11.
doi:10.1186/s40779-020-00240-0.
PMC 7068984.
PMID 32169119.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak by the World Health Organization
Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) by the The Journal of the American Medical Association
Coronavirus: Latest news and resources by the BMJ Publishing Group
Novel Coronavirus Information Center by Elsevier
COVID-19 Resource Centre by The Lancet
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 by Nature
Coronavirus (Covid-19) by New England Journal of Medicine
Covid-19: Novel Coronavirus by Wiley Publishing
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), previously known by the provisional name 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus.
It is contagious in humans and is the cause of the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) that has been designated a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization (WHO).SARS-CoV-2 has close genetic similarity to bat coronaviruses, from which it likely originated.
An intermediate animal reservoir such as a pangolin is also thought to be involved in its introduction to humans.
From a taxonomic perspective, SARS-CoV-2 is classified as a strain of the species severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARSr-CoV).The strain was first discovered in Wuhan, China, so it has sometimes been referred to as the "Wuhan virus" or "Wuhan coronavirus".
Because the World Health Organization discourages the use of names based upon locations and to avoid confusion with the disease SARS, it sometimes refers to the virus as "the virus responsible for COVID-19" or "the COVID-19 virus" in public health communications.
Both the virus and the disease are often called "coronavirus" by the general public, but scientists and most journalists typically use more precise terms.
Human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been confirmed during the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic.
Transmission occurs primarily via respiratory droplets from coughs and sneezes within a range of about 2 metres (6 ft 7 in).
Indirect contact via contaminated surfaces is another possible cause of infection.
Preliminary research indicates that the virus may remain viable on plastic and steel for up to three days, but does not survive on cardboard for more than one day or on copper for more than four hours, and is inactivated by soap.
Viral RNA has also been found in stool samples from infected people.Whether the virus is infectious during the incubation period is uncertain.
On 1 February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) indicated that "transmission from asymptomatic cases is likely not a major driver of transmission".
However, an epidemiological model of the beginning of the outbreak in China suggested that "pre-symptomatic shedding may be typical among documented infections" and that subclinical infections may have been the source of a majority of infections.
The first known infections from the SARS-CoV-2 strain were discovered in Wuhan, China.
The original source of viral transmission to humans and when the strain became pathogenic remains unclear.
Research into the natural reservoir of the virus strain that caused the 2002–2004 SARS outbreak has resulted in the discovery of many SARS-like bat coronaviruses, most originating in the Rhinolophus genus of horseshoe bats, and two viral nucleic acid sequences found in samples taken from Rhinolophus sinicus show a resemblance of 80% to SARS-CoV-2.
A third viral nucleic acid sequence from Rhinolophus affinis, collected in Yunnan province and designated RaTG13, has a 96% resemblance to SARS-CoV-2.
The WHO considers bats the most likely natural reservoir of SARS-CoV-2, but differences between the bat coronavirus and SARS-CoV-2 suggest that humans were infected via an intermediate host.A metagenomic study published in 2019 previously revealed that SARS-CoV, the strain of the virus that causes SARS, was the most widely distributed coronavirus among a sample of Sunda pangolins.
On 7 February 2020, it was announced that researchers from Guangzhou had discovered a pangolin sample with a viral nucleic acid sequence "99% identical" to SARS-CoV-2.
When released, the results clarified that "the receptor-binding domain of the S protein of the newly discovered Pangolin-CoV is virtually identical to that of 2019-nCoV, with one amino acid difference."
Pangolins are protected under Chinese law, but their poaching and trading for use in traditional Chinese medicine remains common.Microbiologists and geneticists in Texas have independently found evidence of reassortment in coronaviruses suggesting involvement of pangolins in the origin of SARS-CoV-2.
However, pangolin coronaviruses found to date only share at most 92% of their whole genomes with SARS-CoV-2, making them less similar than RaTG13 to SARS-CoV-2.
This is insufficient to prove pangolins to be the intermediate host; in comparison, the SARS virus responsible for the 2002–2004 outbreak shared 99.8% of its genome with a known civet coronavirus.
SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the broad family of viruses known as coronaviruses.
It is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (+ssRNA) virus.
Other coronaviruses are capable of causing illnesses ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
It is the seventh known coronavirus to infect people, after 229E, NL63, OC43, HKU1, MERS-CoV, and the original SARS-CoV.Like the SARS-related coronavirus strain implicated in the 2003 SARS outbreak, SARS-CoV-2 is a member of the subgenus Sarbecovirus (beta-CoV lineage B).
Its RNA sequence is approximately 30,000 bases in length.
SARS-CoV-2 is unique among known betacoronaviruses in its incorporation of a polybasic cleavage site, a characteristic known to increase pathogenicity and transmissibility in other viruses.With a sufficient number of sequenced genomes, it is possible to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree of the mutation history of a family of viruses.
By 12 January 2020, five genomes of SARS-CoV-2 had been isolated from Wuhan and reported by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) and other institutions; the number of genomes increased to 42 by 30 January 2020.
A phylogenetic analysis of those samples showed they were "highly related with at most seven mutations relative to a common ancestor", implying that the first human infection occurred in November or December 2019.
As of 13 March 2020, 410 SARS-CoV-2 genomes sampled on five continents were publicly available.On 11 February 2020, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) announced that according to existing rules that compute hierarchical relationships among coronaviruses on the basis of five conserved sequences of nucleic acids, the differences between what was then called 2019-nCoV and the virus strain from the 2003 SARS outbreak were insufficient to make them separate viral species.
Therefore, they identified 2019-nCoV as a strain of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus.
Each SARS-CoV-2 virion is approximately 50–200 nanometres in diameter.
Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has four structural proteins, known as the S (spike), E (envelope), M (membrane), and N (nucleocapsid) proteins; the N protein holds the RNA genome, and the S, E, and M proteins together create the viral envelope.
The spike protein, which has been imaged at the atomic level using cryogenic electron microscopy, is the protein responsible for allowing the virus to attach to the membrane of a host cell.Protein modeling experiments on the spike protein of the virus soon suggested that SARS-CoV-2 has sufficient affinity to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors of human cells to use them as a mechanism of cell entry.
By 22 January 2020, a group in China working with the full virus genome and a group in the United States using reverse genetics methods independently and experimentally demonstrated that ACE2 could act as the receptor for SARS-CoV-2.
Studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2 has a higher affinity to human ACE2 than the original SARS virus strain.
SARS-CoV-2 may also use basigin to gain cell entry.Initial spike protein priming by transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) is essential for entry of SARS-CoV-2.
After a SARS-CoV-2 virion attaches to a target cell, the cell's protease TMPRSS2 cuts open the spike protein of the virus, exposing a fusion peptide.
The virion then releases RNA into the cell, forcing the cell to produce copies of the virus that are disseminated to infect more cells.
SARS-CoV-2 produces at least three virulence factors that promote shedding of new virions from host cells and inhibit immune response.
Based upon the low variability exhibited among known SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences, the strain is thought to have been detected by health authorities within weeks of its emergence among the human population in late 2019.
The earliest case of infection currently known is thought to have been found on 17 November 2019.
The virus subsequently spread to all provinces of China and to more than one hundred other countries in Asia, Europe, North America, South America, Africa, and Oceania.
Human-to-human transmission of the virus has been confirmed in all of these regions.
On 30 January 2020, SARS-CoV-2 was designated a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the WHO, and on 11 March 2020 the WHO declared it a pandemic.As of 22 March 2020 (18:45 UTC), there were 328,275 confirmed cases of infection, of which 81,397 were in mainland China.
While the proportion of infections that result in confirmed infection or progress to diagnosable disease remains unclear, one mathematical model estimated the number of people infected in Wuhan alone at 75,815 as of 25 January 2020, at a time when confirmed infections were far lower.
The total number of deaths attributed to the virus was 14,366 as of 22 March 2020 (18:45 UTC); 94,704 people had recovered from infection by that time.
Under a third of all deaths have occurred in Hubei province, where Wuhan is located.
Before 24 February 2020, the proportion was over 95%.The basic reproduction number (
R
0
{\displaystyle R_{0}}
) of the virus has been estimated to be between 1.4 and 3.9.
This means that each infection from the virus is expected to result in 1.4 to 3.9 new infections when no members of the community are immune and no preventive measures are taken.
"Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)".
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
11 February 2020.
"Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak".
World Health Organization (WHO).
"SARS-CoV-2 (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) Sequences".
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
"COVID-19 Resource Centre".
The Lancet.
"Coronavirus (Covid-19)".
The New England Journal of Medicine.
"Covid-19: Novel Coronavirus Content Free to Access".
Wiley.
"2019-nCoV Data Portal".
Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource.
List of incidents of xenophobia and racism related to the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic
The 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic, which was first reported in the city of Wuhan, Hubei, China, in December 2019, has led to increased prejudice, xenophobia, discrimination, violence and racism against Chinese people and people of East Asian and Southeast Asian descent and appearance around the world.
On 26 February 2020, an incident involving a fight was reported in La Plata between a Chinese supermarket owner and an Argentine delivery man.
The fight was triggered because the delivery man jokingly said "¿Qué hacés, coronavirus?"
("What's up, coronavirus?"), making a joke about Chinese people and the coronavirus.
Both men ended up injured and the police later had to intervene.
On 26 January 2020, two of Australia's highest circulating newspapers published provocative headlines.
Melbourne's Herald Sun's headline read, "Chinese virus pandamonium", a misspelling of "pandemonium" and alluding to China's native pandas, while Sydney's Daily Telegraph's headline read "China kids stay home".
One of the outcomes of these headlines was a petition of over 51,000 signatures demanding an apology.At a Woolworths supermarket in Port Hedland, Western Australia, a person reported an incident whereby a staff member removed and refused entry to customers who appeared to be of Asian descent, claiming it was to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus.
A witness to the incident made a complaint that was upheld by Woolworths who confirmed that the staff member had been in the wrong, apologised for the incident and said they were conducting a full investigation into the incident.Ravenswood School for Girls, a private school on Sydney's North Shore asked a South Korean student to leave her dormitory – even though she had not been to China since visiting Shanghai in October 2019 and was medically cleared when she arrived at the school.
Similarly, a Chinese-Malaysian student in Perth found herself evicted from her shared home upon returning to Australia after visiting her home country for Lunar New Year.There has been a growing number of reports where members of the Chinese-Australian and Asian-Australian communities have been subjected to verbal vitriol and racist slurs, in addition to suggestions on social media to cull the Chinese race and "burn down" China to stop the epidemic.
On 20 March 2020, a student wearing a mask in Hobart, Tasmania was told, "you've got the virus" and "go back to your country" before being punched leaving him with a bruised eye and broken glasses.
The reason for the attack was partly attributed to the cultural differences in wearing masks in Eastern and Western cultures.Chinese restaurants and establishments in Sydney and Melbourne have seen a dramatic drop in business, with trade declining by over 70%.On 28 January 2020, a man collapsed and died of a suspected cardiac arrest outside of a restaurant in Sydney's Chinatown.
Unconfirmed viral videos circulating on social media suggest that bystanders refused to perform CPR out of fear of the novel coronavirus.According to an online Ipsos MORI poll, 23% of Australian respondents would consider in the future avoiding people of Chinese origin to protect themselves from coronavirus.
There have been reports by Asian people of increased racism in Belgium.A woman was called "coronavirus", threatened, and spat on by five youths in Schaerbeek.A photograph depicting high school students in Chinese costumes while holding a sign that said "Corona Time" was posted on the official Facebook and Instagram of Sint-Paulusschool Campus College Waregem, a secondary school, in March 2020.
One of the students added latex gloves and a medical mask to his attire in reference to the outbreak, while another student stretched her eyes in a racist gesture.
The photograph was removed after online backlash.
The school released a statement, claiming that the school team and the last-grade students had no intention to be condescending or offensive.
However, the activist Instagram that reposted the racist image stated that, "As an educational institution, you have a very large influence on the future generation.
The fact that you approve of this kind of behaviour and promote it yourself on your channels is far from responsible and shows that something is wrong with you."In Brussels, a 22-year-old man punched a 24-year-old Asian man and accused him of being "the cause" of coronavirus in Belgium.
Local authorities quarantined three Japanese nationals despite them having no coronavirus-related symptoms.
The US embassy issued a travel warning to US citizens amid reports of "...verbal and online harassment, stone throwing, and banging on vehicles occupied by expatriates,"
On 26 January 2020, Peter Akman, a reporter who was with CTV News, tweeted an image of his Asian barber in mask and said, "Hopefully all I got today was a haircut."
He was fired after the tweet was reported.Chinese-Canadian businesses in Vancouver have reported a drop in business ranging from 50 to 70 percent.
In the Greater Toronto Area, Chinese restaurants have reported a drop in sales ranging from 30 to 80 percent.On 28 January 2020, 9,000 parents of a school district in the York Region, just north of Toronto signed a petition calling on the York Region District School Board to keep students whose family have visited China home from school for 17 days, and that schools keep track of these students' travels and inform other parents so they could decide whether to pull their kids out of class.
The York Region School Board rejected the petition, stating that it could potentially stoke racism.On 29 January 2020, Theresa Tam, Chief Public Health Officer of Canada and head of the Public Health Agency of Canada, expressed her concern.
Tam, who is originally from Hong Kong, tweeted that "I am concerned about the growing number of reports of racism and stigmatizing comments on social media directed to people of Chinese and Asian descent related to 2019-nCoV coronavirus."On 17 March 2020, two Korean men were stabbed in Montreal, prompting the Korean Consulate to issue a warning to those of Korean heritage in the city to be cautious and report any incidents to the consulate.
Despite no apparent racial motives behind the attacks, the victims believed that the attacks were racially motivated.
On 15 February 2020, during a Croatian Table Tennis Superleague match which was played in Dubrovnik between the local team Libertas Marinkolora and guest team STK Starr from Varaždin, a number of insulting comments were posted on the official Libertas Marinkolora Facebook page towards a Croatian player of Chinese origin, Tan Ruiwu of STK Starr which referenced the coronavirus.
This included a comment by the manager of Libertas Marinkolor Marko Habijanec in which he instructed one of his players (who was facing Tan in the next match) to "Beat this virus."
The comments were subsequently deleted.
Libertas Marinkolor eventually issued an apology and condemnation of the incident.
According to the Embassy of Japan in Cairo, store clerks have been hesitating to serve Japanese customers, and "corona" has also become a new slur with which to abuse Japanese people on the street.On 10 March 2020, an Uber driver was arrested after a viral video showing the driver forcibly removing his Chinese passenger at a highway in Cairo's Maadi district on suspicion of having the virus.
In the video, a voice is heard in the video jokingly shouting "The first coronavirus case in Egypt!" and the same voice then tells the driver "May God support you, Hajji!
Throw him out!."
The incident has sparked outrage among Egyptians after the video was uploaded.
Some Egyptians visited the Chinese man in his hotel and expressed apology to him for the incident, widely condemned in the local media as an act of bullying and racism.
Asians in Finland have reported instances of discrimination prompted by the novel coronavirus outbreak in China.
Various people with backgrounds in China, Vietnam, and Japan told Yle that they feel to have been subjected to racist treatment since news broke about the virus.
On 23 February, Helsinki Times reported that at least one Chinese restaurant in Helsinki had seen a downturn in bookings since the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak.
A Chinese supermarket reported a dramatic drop in people coming into the store but an uptick in online sales, with customers opting to have goods delivered to their homes.
French newspaper Le Courrier Picard featured an Asian woman wearing a mask on its front page on 26 January 2020 with a headline "Yellow Alert".
The paper also titled an editorial "A New Yellow Peril".
The publication drew condemnation from French Asians who started the hashtag #JeNeSuisPasUnVirus (which translates to "I Am Not A Virus").
Other French newspapers called the Covid-19 as "Chinese Virus" at the beginning of the outbreak which could stigmatise people of Chinese descent.
Numerous reports indicate a significant increase in harassment and violent attacks toward people of certain Asian origins.
Some children of Asian descent were ostracised and mocked over their origins in middle schools near Paris.Non-Western restaurants, including Chinese, Thai, Cambodian, and Japanese have reported a decline in customers.
The scale of the decline typically ranged from 30 to 50 percent.Many French-Vietnamese report also being subject to harassment since the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan.South Korean media have reported an increased animosity toward South Korean nationals.Japan's public service broadcaster NHK, which provides a list of overseas safety risks for traveling, recently listed anti-Japanese discrimination as a safety risk when traveling to France and other European countries.
Some Japanese nationals have reported an increase in anti-Japanese incidents, such as being mocked on the street and refused taxi service, and least one Japanese restaurant has been vandalized.
A Japanese actress working for the French company Louis Vuitton received a number of coronavirus-related comments on the company's Instagram page, which the company later deleted.
A group of Japanese students on a study tour in Paris received abuse by locals.Asians in Paris have reported an increase in racism and harassment.
Numerous racial incidences and discrimination against those of Asian descent in Germany have been reported by news media.The weekly magazine Der Spiegel has published a controversial cover which has been considered by some as blaming China for the outbreak and fueling xenophobia.
The Chinese Embassy in Berlin has acknowledged a rise in hostile cases against its citizens since the outbreak.
On 1 February 2020, a 23-year old Chinese citizen in Berlin reportedly received racist insults and was subsequently beaten by two unknown assailants, in an incident classified by police as "xenophobic".A Chinese student from Chengdu living in Berlin was given two weeks notice to leave her sublet apartment by her landlord, German actress Gabrielle Scharnitzky.
Scharnitzky defended her actions, stating "I had to protect myself against a real possible danger of infection by a person returning from a virus-contaminated area, entering and leaving my home and thus endangering my health and the health of my visitors".
The student reportedly informed Scharnitzky of her intentions to visit China in January; although the trip never took place, she was nevertheless evicted.
On 5 February 2020, a Chinese woman in Berlin, who had not visited China in three months, was reportedly turned away by her gynecologist, claiming that the coronavirus may infect pregnant women in the clinic.
In the same month, a Chinese student in Essen with a sore throat was denied an appointment by a general practitioner over coronavirus fears, despite not having been to China since September 2019.
She was instead told to go the emergency room, where she was diagnosed with bronchitis.
In Munich, a German woman of Chinese descent was assaulted by a neighbor, who sprayed her with disinfectant, screamed "Corona" at her and threatened to cut her head off.
The man is facing charges of assault and threat; the state protection department is investigating a possible racist motive for the crime.German football club RB Leipzig denied entry to a group of 20 Japanese fans over coronavirus fears.In Nuremberg, locals threw raw eggs at homes owned by Japanese residents.The embassy of South Korea in Germany warned its citizens of rising anti-Korean violence.According to an Ipsos MORI poll in early February, 28% of German respondents would consider avoiding people of Chinese origin in the future to protect themselves from the coronavirus.
More than 100 restaurants in Hong Kong have turned away customers from mainland China, with one restaurant demanding that a customer produce a Hong Kong identity card to prove they were not from the mainland.
Tenno Ramen, a Japanese noodle restaurant in Hung Hom, refused to serve mainland Chinese customers.
The restaurant said on Facebook, "We want to live longer.
We want to safeguard local customers.
Please excuse us."
Another example is Kwong Wing Catering, a pro-2019–20 Hong Kong protests restaurant chain, which announced on Facebook on 28 January 2020 that it would only serve English or Cantonese-speaking but not Mandarin-speaking customers since the government did not implement a border closure against mainland Chinese.
However, Mandarin is also the common tongue in Taiwan, so the said Facebook post was then updated a day later to clarify that they welcome Taiwanese customers.
Chinese-owned businesses, including those in the predominantly Asian Józsefváros Market in Budapest, have reported a significant drop in sales, which owners have attributed to the coronavirus.
Some businesses have opted to signal to potential customers that they are from another Asian country.
The Foreign Policy reported that "On social media, Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram posts encourage people to stay away from places where Chinese citizens or Chinese-heritage Indonesians work and live.
...
Major media outlets are also complicit in spreading anti-Chinese conspiracies."A demonstration was staged outside a hotel in Bukittinggi, rejecting the visit of tourists from Southern China who stayed there amid fear of coronavirus.
The demonstrators demanded that the tourists be isolated in an airport, and showed distrust over screening tools in airports.
It ended after police guaranteed that the tourists would stay in the hotel up to the following day, when the tourists depart from the city.In a press release, the embassy of Japan in Indonesia stated that incidents of discrimination and harassment toward Japanese people had increased in the midst of the pandemic, and announced they had set up a help center to assist Japanese residents dealing with these incidents.
In general, there have been reports of widespread anti-Japanese discrimination and harassment in the country, with hotels, stores, restaurants, taxi services and more refusing Japanese customers, and many Japanese people were no longer allowed in meetings and conferences.
The embassy of Japan has also received at least a dozen reports of harassment toward Japanese people in just a few days.
Indian Islamic cleric Ilyas Sharafuddin said in an audio address that the coronavirus outbreak was a "punishment of Allah on China for mistreating Uighur Muslims".
Ilyas said that "they [the Chinese] have threatened the Muslims and tried to destroy lives of 20 million Muslims.
Muslims were forced to drink alcohol, their mosques were destroyed and their Holy Book was burned.
They thought that no one can challenge them, but Allah the most powerful punished them."
He added that "Romans, Persians, and Russians who were arrogant and stood against Islam," were all destroyed by Allah.Students from Northeast India, which shares a border with Tibet, who study in major Indian cities have reportedly experienced harassment related to the coronavirus outbreak.
For instance, Northeast Indian students in Kirori Mal College, Delhi, have filed a complaint to college authorities about harassment in the hands of other students.
Eight students from Northeast India at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai also alleged that they were subjected to racism and harassment.The Bharatiya Janata Party's State unit president in West Bengal Dilip Ghosh stated that the Chinese had destroyed nature and "that's why the God took revenge against them."
The remarks were later condemned by the Chinese consulate in Kolkata, calling it "erroneous."There were rumors that some Muslims who returned from Dubai refused to undergo coronavirus testing for religious reasons.
The news was then amplified by bloggers and some some social media channels, but it was later debunked and confirmed to be false.
More than 1,000 South Korean tourists were instructed to avoid public places and remain in isolation in their hotels.
The Israeli military announced its intention to quarantine some 200 South Korean nationals to a military base.
Many of the remaining South Koreans were rejected by hotels and were forced to spend nights at Ben Gurion Airport.
An Israeli newspaper subsequently published a Korean complaint that "Israel is Treating [Korean and other Asian] Tourists Like Coronavirus".
Public health expert Dr. Hagai Levine said that Israeli politicians may be overreaching to impress voters.On 14 March 2020, an Indian man from the Bnei Menashe community was attacked and beaten by several unidentified individuals in Tiberias  who called him "Chinese" and "Corona".
The man was hospitalized at the Baruch Padeh Medical Center in Tiberas.
La Repubblica reported that the director of Rome's prestigious Santa Cecilia music conservatory, Roberto Giuliani, suspended lessons for all Asian students—Korean, Chinese, Japanese, with Koreans the largest group affected—due to the epidemic, though most of the students were second-generation immigrants.According to The Washington Post, people especially from South Korea and China experienced increased mockery and discrimination.It was posted on social media that a bar around the Trevi Fountain had a sign not allowing entrance to anyone from China because of "international safety measures".
It was later removed by police.Dozens of Chinese stores were vandalized in the northern towns of Como, Brescia, and Varese.
Many Chinese stores reported a decline in business.People of Chinese and Filipino descents reported assaults (some serious enough to require hospitalization), harassment, and being refused services.
Some public officials asked students of Asian origin to stay home.On 24 February 2020, a Chinese man was barred from entering a gas station in Cassola in Vicenza, Veneto and was told "You have coronavirus, you cannot enter!" at which point somebody broke a bottle on his head causing severe injuries.
The same day, an elderly Filipino pensioner was attacked and punched in a supermarket in the town of Mariano Comense, in Como, Lombardy.
Singer and TV personality Francesco Facchinetti was seen intervening and defending the victim.Veneto regional governor Luca Zaia apologized after claiming that the Chinese eat live mice.On 8 March 2020, a Japanese restaurant in Rivoli, in Torino, Piedmont was the target of an arson attack by a group of teens who taunted the owners, calling them carriers of the epidemic.
In Japan, the hashtag #ChineseDontComeToJapan had been trending on Twitter; furthermore, on Twitter, Japanese people have called Chinese tourists "dirty", "insensitive", and "bioterrorists".A server at a restaurant in Ito, a Japanese city on the Izu Peninsula south of Tokyo, was recorded shouting at a tourist "China!
Out!"
A Chinese woman, who was the target of the outburst, immediately left the restaurant.A confectionery shop in Hakone, Kanagawa Prefecture put up a sign saying "No Chinese allowed!" prompting Chinese citizens to boycott the store.According to an Ipsos MORI poll, 28% of Japanese respondents said they would consider avoiding people of Chinese origin in the future to protect themselves from coronavirus.
In February 2020, a conflict broke out between ethnic Kazakhs and Chinese Muslims.
According to The Diplomat, "In the hours following the incident, fake news about "ruthless pogroms in Kazakhstan around the spreading of coronavirus" circulated around social media, fueling hysteria in other parts of the country."
A petition in Malaysia calling for citizens from China to be banned from entering the country claimed that the "new virus is widely spread throughout the world because of their unhygienic lifestyle".
The petition was reportedly signed by a little over 250,000 people within a week.
Dutch public broadcasting news network NOS has reported that on many of its Facebook and Instagram posts about the coronavirus, there have been a great number of "racist, discriminating and anti-Chinese comments".
Dutch residents of Asian descent report having been called out as carriers of the coronavirus during their commute, in the supermarket, in school, and on social media.On 6 February 2020, radio DJ Lex Gaarthuis presented his Carnaval song "Voorkomen is beter dan Chinezen" (a pun on the proverb Voorkomen is beter dan genezen – "prevention is better than cure" – with Chinezen referring to both Chinese people and eating Chinese food) on national radio station Radio 10 under his alter ego Toon, which includes the lyrics "we can't have the virus in our country, it is all caused by these stinking Chinese people" and "don't eat Chinese food."
After many complaints were issued against Radio 10 and Gaarthuis, primarily by the Chinese community in the Netherlands, both the station and artist made formal apologies, with Gaarthuis saying the song was meant to be satirical but had overshot its mark.On 8 February 2020, a group of Chinese students living in a student dormitory of Wageningen University discovered that their floor had been vandalised.
Damages included a Chinese flag torn from a student's door and shredded, an elevator littered with feces and urine, and walls defaced with English language insults such as "DIE CHINESE" and "CHINESE CORONA".
Dutch police investigated the incident, but no suspects have been identified.On 10 February 2020, a 65-year-old Dutch man of Chinese descent was kicked off his bicycle in Amsterdam by two young men on a scooter.
One of the culprits filmed the incident and uploaded it to his Snapchat story.
He later downplayed criticism saying "don't you worry guys, it was a Chinese man" and only turned himself in to police after becoming the target of widespread Internet vigilantism.On a KLM flight from Amsterdam to Seoul on 11 February 2020, flight attendants put up a sign in Korean discouraging passengers from using a restroom on the plane allegedly reserved for the flight crew, apparently out of fear of the coronavirus.
A spokesman for the airline has since issued an apology, stating "we are deeply sorry that this was viewed as discrimination, which was absolutely not the intention of the crew" and that it is not company policy to reserve specific lavatories for flight crew.
Many Koreans and Dutch people of Korean descent have reported a spate of anti-Korean incidents, from vandalism of their homes to violent assaults and harassment, and more than 150 Korean expat respondents in an online survey indicated they had experienced a xenophobic incident.On the evening of 22 February 2020, a 24-year-old Dutch student of Chinese descent was assaulted by a group of students in her dormitory in Tilburg, suffering a concussion and knife wounds, after she asked them to stop singing Gaarthuis' Carnaval song.In late February 2020, the Japanese School of Amsterdam cautioned parents not to bring their children to playgrounds and other places frequented by local children, amidst a spate of violent bullying incidents targeting Japanese children.On 16 March 2020, a residence in Diemen was smeared with words reading "KANKER CHINEES CORONA" ("cancerous Chinese corona" in English), which was publicly denounced by Mayor Erik Boog.
MP Raymond Huo stated that there were racial abuse incidents in the country's Chinese community.
An online petition to prevent people from China from entering the country was signed by more than 18,000 people.
In Canterbury, an email was sent to a Chinese-origin student's parent, which reportedly said, "our Kiwi kids don't want to be in the same class with your disgusting virus spreaders."Mayor of Auckland Phil Goff stated that he was "sickened" by the reports of Asian-origin people being racially targeted at swimming pools, public transport and restaurants.
On 1 March 2020, a Palestinian mother with her daughter chanted "Corona, corona" to the two Japanese women who were in Ramallah for non-governmental aid mission.
The mother then attacked and pulled the hair of one of the Japanese women who attempted to record the incident.
The Palestinian woman was later arrested that day.
Ramallah Governor Leila Ghannam invited the two Japanese women to thank them for their relief efforts as well as a senior police officer gave flowers during a visit to the non-governmental organization's office.
Various Filipino-Chinese advocacy groups have warned that racism against the Chinese community has risen after the outbreak has started.
The Federation of Filipino Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Inc and the Trade Union of Congress of the Philippines have condemned anti-Chinese propaganda with links to the virus.
Adamson University, a prominent Catholic school in Manila, received online backlash for ordering all its Chinese students to quarantine themselves amid the new coronavirus outbreak.
A crematorium refused to handle the corpse of a Chinese national who died from the virus.President Rodrigo Duterte has made appeals to the public to stop discriminating against anyone who has Chinese ancestry.
In Moscow and Yekaterinburg, Chinese nationals are targeted by quarantine enforcing campaigns, as well as police raids, which were condemned as racial profiling.In Blagoveshchensk, at least one hotel has barred Chinese nationals from booking rooms, and markets operated by people of Chinese origin have seen their sales plummeting.According to an Ipsos MORI poll, 37% of Russian respondents would consider avoiding people of Chinese origin, the highest of the eight countries surveyed.
Images of a South Asian migrant worker who was dressed as a human hand sanitiser while wearing a face mask for Saudi Aramco went viral online and sparked global outrage and was cited as another example of "coronavirus racism".
The company later apologised for the incident.
An online petition urging the Singaporean government to ban Chinese nationals and travellers from China from entering the island country was signed by 125,000 people.The Ministry of Home Affairs has ordered an investigation against an Islamic teacher, Abdul Halim bin Abdul Karim, after he had posted on Facebook that the coronavirus pandemic was "a retribution by Allah against the Chinese for their oppressive treatment of Muslim Uighurs in Xinjiang."
In a separate post, Abdul Halim claimed that Chinese people do not wash properly after defecating and were not as hygienic as Muslims, causing the virus to spread.
Home Affairs and Law Minister K. Shanmugam slammed the comments as "silly", "xenophobic" and "thoroughly racist" and is "quite unacceptable from anyone, let alone someone who is supposed to be a religious teacher."
The Islamic Religious Council of Singapore said it is aware of the post, which "expresses views that do not represent the Muslim community" and was investigating the matter.
In response, Abdul Halim said that his Facebook post written in Malay, was not intended to be racist and did not target "any particular race".
In February 2020, an entrance to a South Korean restaurant in downtown Seoul reportedly had a sign in red Chinese characters stating: "No Chinese Allowed".
"No Chinese" signs have been cropping up throughout the country, and some businesses are banning all foreigners.More than 760,000 South Korean citizens have signed a petition lobbying the government to ban Chinese tourists from entering the country.
The Daegu Lantern Festival posted a notice in English that no foreigners are allowed to visit their festival.
A group of Singaporean tourists were reportedly denied permission to climb the tourist attraction Ella Rock due to their appearance.
A restaurant in Chiang Mai displayed a sign which read, "We apologize we are not accepting CHINESE customers.
Thank you." after a customer left the restaurant upon noticing a group of Chinese people inside.
The police demanded that the sign be taken down, but suggested that it could be rewritten in Chinese as "We ran out of food".
A similar sign was seen outside a restaurant in Ao Sane Beach in Phuket.Graffiti artist Headache Stencil reportedly tweeted, "Hey Chink!
Please go back to ur shit-eating country.
Our government need ur money to keep their power but you all not welcome for us now.
#notwelcometothailand #backtourchinklandpls".Health minister Anutin Charnvirakul made negative comments about "dirty" Westerners, saying they "never shower" and are more likely to spread the virus than Asians.
On 20 February 2020, 45 Ukrainians and 27 foreign nationals evacuated from Wuhan to Novi Sanzhary were met by a mob lighting bonfires and hurling stones.
Chinese people in the United Kingdom say they are facing increasing levels of racist abuse.Chinese businesses in the United Kingdom, including the busy Chinese takeaway segment and businesses in Chinatown, London recorded significantly reduced customers in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak compared to usual elevated sales related to Chinese New Year celebrations, due to fears of coronavirus spreading through food or unhygienic working practices.
In London, a student of the Royal Holloway University was verbally abused by train passengers at Clapham Junction station, while a similar incident was reported by passengers on the London Underground.On 30 January 2020, a postgraduate student walking alone while wearing a face mask on West Street in Sheffield city centre, towards the University of Sheffield, was verbally abused and nudged by three people.Tottenham Hotspur footballer Dele Alli posted a video on Snapchat where he wore a face mask and appeared to mock an Asian man seated near him in Dubai about the coronavirus outbreak.
He later apologised and deleted the video.A 24-year old Thai tax consultant in London was violently assaulted and robbed by two teenagers yelling "coronavirus" at the man.In Solihull, a woman of Chinese origin was allegedly called "a dirty Chink" and told "Take your fucking coronavirus back home!".
A woman of Indian origin who tried to intervene was beaten up and later hospitalised.On 2 March 2020, a Singaporean Chinese student studying at University College London was beaten up when walking past a group of young people who shouted "I don't want your coronavirus in my country" to him in Oxford Street, London.
He suffered fractures on his face and bruises on his eye.
The Metropolitan Police in London are investigating this assault.
Two teenagers have been arrested in relation to the incident.A Vietnamese art curator was dropped as an assistant for an exhibit of contemporary Vietnamese fine art at the Affordable Art Fair.
The dealer in charge of the exhibit explained in an email that she could no longer participate because "Asians are being seen as carriers of the virus" and that the presence of a Vietnamese curator "would unfortunately create hesitation on the part of the audience to enter the exhibition space."An NHS nurse of Asian descent stated she was assaulted and racially abused by a couple at a train station during her commute for a nightshift at a hospital.
In an infographic on common reactions to the novel coronavirus epidemic posted by University Health Services at the University of California, Berkeley, the school advised that "Xenophobia: fears about interacting with those who might be from Asia and guilt about these feelings" is normal.
The university was criticized for "normalizing racism".
Koreans in the U.S. were hesitating to wear masks in public amid reports of hate crimes and racism towards Asians who wore masks.On 10 March 2020, a Korean woman in Midtown Manhattan, New York City, was confronted on the street by somebody yelling "Where is your corona mask, you Asian bitch?" before punching the woman, dislocating her jaw.
Later in the week, in Forest Hills, Queens, New York City, an Asian man walking with his 10-year-old son was harassed by a person yelling, "Where the fuck is your mask?
You fucking Chinese" before being hit over the head.
Another incident occurred on 16 March where a woman in Midtown Manhattan was spat upon, and had her hair pulled out by a woman who blamed her for coronavirus.In the New York City Subway, a woman wearing a face mask was punched and kicked by a man who called her "diseased".
Numerous other incidences of harassment of Asians on the New York City Subway followed, including one in which a person was seen spraying an Asian man with an unknown substance;
another involving a man harassing an Asian couple wearing masks before the couple was chaperoned to safety;
and one in which a woman was confronted by a man saying, "You're Chinese, why did you bring corona to America?".In a Philadelphia SEPTA subway station, an Asian couple was surrounded by a group and attacked.
Harassment and attacks on Asians have included a reporter for the Philadelphia Inquirer who was verbally harassed several times.Chinatown in Houston faced a drop in customers after people falsely and maliciously spread rumors online of an outbreak of the coronavirus.
Restaurants in Chinatown in Boston have also lost customers due to fears of coronavirus.
The government of New York City cited a report which estimated a 40 percent sales drop for Chinese businesses in Flushing, Queens, while other reports suggested the drop ranged from 30 to 80 percent.In Los Angeles, a Thai-American woman on the Los Angeles subway captured footage of a man screaming racist comments and expletives about coronavirus.
On 13 February 2020, Los Angeles authorities spoke out against a number of bullying incidents and assaults against the Asian-American community, including a middle-schooler being beaten and hospitalized.
A 16-year-old boy in San Fernando Valley was physically attacked by bullies in his high school who accused him of having the coronavirus because he is Asian-American.
Robin Toma of the L.A.
County Human Relations Commission stated, "Many may be quick to assume that just because someone is Asian or from China that somehow they are more likely to be carriers of the virus.
We need to speak out against this when we see it.
We need to speak up, not be bystanders, be upstanders."
Other forms of harassment in Los Angeles included fake World Health Organization (WHO) flyers advising people to avoid Asian-American restaurants.In Alhambra, an Asian American-dominant city, a petition was circulated urging schools to close over coronavirus risks was signed by over 14,000 people.Two Hmong men were rejected from two hotels in Indiana due to being perceived to have the coronavirus by the hotel staff.40,000 people signed a petition to expel two students from Bolsa Grande High School after they were seen in videos bullying Vietnamese-American students.
Garden Grove Unified School District's public information officer responded by saying the students will face "disciplinary action in accordance with the California Education Code."Former presidential candidate Andrew Yang spoke of an uptick in anti-Asian racism surrounding the coronavirus.
Several lawmakers, including multiple members of Congress, denounced xenophobia related to the coronavirus in a press conference, and said that Asian-American businesses across the country, from grocery stores to nail salons and restaurants, had been forced into financial crises due to a reduction in customers.In Brooklyn, New York, a social media post was sent from the office of New York State Assemblymember Mathylde Frontus urging citizens to avoid Chinese businesses.
Frontus apologized for the message, blaming the incident on a part-time office assistant sharing a chain email; the staff worker was fired and the rest of the staff was ordered to complete cultural sensitivity training.
The apology by the Assemblymember triggered Brooklyn Community Board 13 member Ronald X. Stewart to post a xenophobic anti-Chinese rant, also targeted to Chinese-Americans, on social media expressing dismay that the Assemblymember had to make an apology.
That community board member was given notice by Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams that his reappointment to the community board would not be renewed.U.S. president Donald Trump frequently referred to the coronavirus as the "Chinese Virus", which many consider to be anti-Chinese and racist.
He later argued this was "not racist at all" after lawmakers including Elizabeth Warren raised objections about the statement.
CNN commentators Chris Cuomo and Jim Acosta also criticized the use of the term "Wuhan Virus" and "Chinese Virus", despite CNN anchors having used those terms in the past.
Asia Times reported that "A number of Vietnamese hotels and guesthouses have reportedly hung signs on their doors saying that Chinese guests are not welcome, while many Vietnamese have gone online to demand the closure of all border crossings with China."
Signs suggesting that Chinese customers are not accepted were seen in front of a shop in Phu Quoc and a restaurant in Da Nang.
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau condemned racism against Chinese Canadians while attending a Lunar New Year festival in Toronto on 29 January 2020.
Likewise, John Tory, the Mayor of Toronto, denounced xenophobia toward Chinese Canadians, amid reports of increasing stigma facing that community.On 30 January 2020, the World Health Organization's Emergency Committee issued a statement advising all countries to be mindful of the "principles of Article 3 of the IHR (the International Health Regulations)", which the WHO says is a caution against "actions that promote stigma or discrimination", when conducting national response measures to the outbreak.In response to the heightened outbreak of the virus in Italy, which caused the Chinese community to shut down businesses due to racist attacks, President Sergio Mattarella made a surprise visit to a primary school in Rome on 6 February 2020, of which nearly half of pupils are Chinese in origin as a show of support and solidarity, saying "Friendship and peace are fundamental and you know it."An online petition entitled We zijn geen virussen!
("We are not viruses!" in English) was started in the Netherlands on 8 February 2020 in protest of racism against Dutch Chinese and others of Asian descent, which garnered over 13,600 signatures on its first day and was signed over 57,600 times at the end of the month.On 27 February 2020, the High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet called for solidarity with people of ethnic Asian origin subject to such discrimination.On 14 March 2020, more than 200 civil rights groups in the United States demanded that the House of Representatives and Senate leadership publicly denounce the growing amount of anti-Asian racism related to the pandemic and take "tangible steps to counter the hysteria" around the coronavirus, offering the passage of a joint resolution denouncing the racism and xenophobia as one solution.
Yellow Peril
Anti-Chinese sentiment
Anti-Japanese sentiment
Anti-Thai sentiment
Anti-Vietnamese sentiment
2019–20 coronavirus pandemic by country and territory
This article documents countries and territories affected by and their responses to the coronavirus responsible for the 2019–20 pandemic first detected in Wuhan, Hubei, China.
It may not include all the most up-to-date major responses and measures.
As of 22 March 2020, a total of 328,275 cases were confirmed with 219,209 active cases and 14,366 deaths in 167 countries and territories, including five cruise ships.
Statistics
Cases have been confirmed in most African countries and territories.
According to Michael Yao, WHO's head of emergency operations in Africa, early detection is vital because the continent's health systems "are already overwhelmed by many ongoing disease outbreaks".
As of 21 March, cases have been confirmed in all African nations except for Botswana, Burundi, Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Mali, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, South Sudan and the disputed states of Somaliland and Western Sahara.
There have been no reported cases in the territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, but there have been suspected cases.
A cluster of mysterious pneumonia cases was detected in December 2019 in Wuhan and eventually spread to the rest of China.
Afterwards, many other Asian countries started to confirm cases, with some of the most affected countries being South Korea, Japan and Iran.
Sophisticated modelling of the outbreak suggests that while the number of cases in China would have been many times higher without interventions such as early detection and isolation of the infected, 66% fewer people would have been infected if China had implemented measures as little as a week earlier.
As of 21 March, cases have been reported in all Asian countries except for Tajikistan and Turkmenistan — while Laos, Myanmar, North Korea and Yemen have suspected cases.
Initial cases in Europe were reported in France, Germany and other countries with a relatively low number of cases.
On 21 February, a large outbreak was reported in Italy, mostly in the north near Milan.
Cases grew rapidly as the outbreak spread across Europe.
As of 18 March, there have been 77,000 confirmed cases and 3,400 deaths in Europe; out of these, 30,000 cases and 2,900 deaths were in Italy.
Cases have been reported in all European countries (some of them exclusively linked to the outbreak in Italy) after Montenegro reported a case on 17 March, and in all European territories after the Isle of Man reported a case on 19 March.
The WHO has declared Europe as the new centre of the virus after the situation improved in China.
As of 21 March, cases have been reported in all North American countries except Belize and Saint Kitts and Nevis, and all North American territories except Anguilla, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands, Saba, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Sint Eustatius, and Turks and Caicos Islands.
Cases have been confirmed in Australia, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam, New Caledonia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea.
Many small Pacific island nations have thus far avoided the outbreak by closing their borders.
Cases have been reported in all Oceanian sovereign states except Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu, and have not been reported in the associated states of Cook Islands and Niue.
As of March 19, cases have been confirmed in all South American countries: Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela and the French overseas department of French Guiana.
No cases have been reported in the Falkland Islands.
The coronavirus was first reported in Latin America on February 26 when Brazil confirmed a case in São Paulo.
Since then, governments across the region have taken an array of actions to protect their citizens and contain the spread of COVID-19.
The outbreak spread to several cruise ships including the Diamond Princess, the Grand Princess, the World Dream, the MS Westerdam and the MS Braemar.Cruise operators have started to either cancel or change their itineraries as countries across the world implement travel restrictions to curb the disease spread.
Ports are refusing to accept cruise ships that have been either to Chinese ports or carrying Chinese passengers during the outbreak.
The Cruise Lines International Association (CLIA), which represents 90% of cruise operators, announced the various precautionary measures being implemented by its members.
All passengers who have travelled to or visited/transited through China, Hong Kong and Macau within 14 days before embarkation will be denied entry into cruise ships.
Any persons in close contact with either suspected or diagnosed cases of coronavirus infection will also be denied entry.
Corona MAP - Daily updated interactive free map of the whole world.
Coronavirus Timeline Map – Maps the timeline of the Coronavirus infections, deaths and recoveries.
Epidemic data for COVID-19 – Maps total cases of coronavirus in the world, China and the United States, along with patient data.
Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases and historical data by Johns Hopkins University
CoronaMapper – Map with several updated statistics
2020 coronavirus pandemic in California
The 2020 coronavirus pandemic in California is part of an ongoing worldwide pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
A state of emergency has been in place in the state since March 4.
A mandatory statewide stay-at-home order was issued on March 19.
As of March 22, 2020, the CDC says that there have been 1,468 confirmed cases and 27 deaths in the state.
On January 25, the CDC confirmed the first case in California, the third case in the U.S. The person, a man in his 50s, was released from the hospital in Orange County on February 1 in good condition to in-home isolation.
On January 31, the CDC confirmed the seventh case in the U.S., a man in Santa Clara County, who had recently traveled to Wuhan.
The man recovered at home and was released from in-home isolation on February 20.On January 29, the U.S. Department of State evacuated 195 of its employees, their families, and other U.S. citizens from Hubei Province aboard a chartered flight to March Air Reserve Base in Riverside County.On February 2, the CDC confirmed the U.S.'s ninth case in a woman in Santa Clara County, California, who had recently traveled to Wuhan.
This case is unrelated to the first case in Santa Clara.
On the same day, the CDC reported the tenth and eleventh cases in San Benito County, including the second instance of human-to-human transmission.On February 5, the U.S. evacuated 345 citizens from Hubei Province and took them to two air bases in California, Travis Air Force Base in Solano County and Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, San Diego, to be quarantined for 14 days.
The evacuees from one more government evacuation flight on February 6 were also taken to bases in Nebraska and Texas.On February 15, the government evacuated 338 U.S. nationals stranded aboard the cruise ship Diamond Princess, which had been held in quarantine in Yokohama, Japan.
Fourteen of those repatriated people were infected with the virus.
Five more nationals who were also reported as being infected were evacuated from the ship the following week, and were quarantined at Travis Air Force Base; several more cases among the evacuees were later confirmed.On February 26, a case of unknown origin was confirmed in a resident of Solano County.
The UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento said that when the person was transferred there on February 19, the medical team suspected it was COVID-19 and asked the CDC to test for SARS-CoV-2.
The CDC initially refused since the person, who had no known exposure to the virus through travel or close contact with a known infected individual, did not meet the criteria for testing.
The person was ultimately tested on February 23; the test results returned positive on February 26.After this first case of community transmission in the U.S., a case with no known origin, was recognized in Solano County, California, the CDC has revised its criteria for testing patients for coronavirus and on February 28 has begun sending out the new guidelines for healthcare workers.
CDC director Dr. Redfield said the new health recommendation should be when a clinician or individual suspects coronavirus, then we should be able to get a test for coronavirus.
On March 1, two cases were reported in Alameda and Solano Counties, in health care workers at the NorthBay VacaValley Hospital.
The workers were exposed to the patient in the case reported February 26 in Solano County.
In Santa Clara County, three more cases were reported, bringing the total number of cases in the county to seven.
A fifth case was reported in a woman with chronic health conditions who is hospitalized; a sixth and seventh cases were reported in a couple who are both hospitalized, and who had recently traveled to Egypt.On March 2, the Santa Clara County Public Health Department reported two new cases, bringing the total to nine.
Both were household contacts of previously confirmed cases and were in home isolation.
In Placer County, a healthcare worker who had close contact with a confirmed case in Solano County's NorthBay VacaValley Hospital was presumptively tested positive.
In Sonoma County, a resident was presumptively tested positive after returning from a cruise ship that departed San Francisco to Mexico.
In San Mateo County, an adult resident was presumptively tested positive; they were placed in isolation in a hospital.
The source of exposure was reported as unknown.
12 new cases were reported on March 3.
Public health officials in Santa Clara County, California confirmed two new cases of unknown origin there.
Public health officials in Contra Costa County confirmed a new case of unknown origin.
The new case was hospitalized.
Public health officials in Los Angeles County confirmed six new cases.
Public health officials in Berkeley confirmed the city's first case of coronavirus in an individual who had recently traveled to Italy.
The new case is isolated at home.
Two new cases were confirmed in Orange County: one in a man in his 60s and another in a woman in her 30s.
Both had recently traveled to foreign countries impacted by coronavirus.On March 4, California public health officials in Placer County reported a second confirmed case in an "older adult" resident with underlying health conditions who was aboard the Princess Cruises cruise ship Grand Princess on a cruise to Mexico that departed San Francisco on February 11 and returned on February 21.
Although initial reports indicated that the new case had been hospitalized in "critically ill" condition, public health officials in Placer County subsequently reported the new case's death later on the same day.
This marked the eleventh death in the United States attributable to coronavirus, the first death in the U.S. attributable to coronavirus outside Washington state, and the first death in California attributable to coronavirus.
The source of the new case's infection appears to be the same as that of a resident of Sonoma County who tested positive on March 2 and who was also aboard the cruise ship Grand Princess on the same dates.
In relation to this, Governor Gavin Newsom declared a State of Emergency in California.
Consequently, Princess Cruises, the owner and operator of the cruise ship Grand Princess, working with the CDC, the state of California, and public health officials in San Francisco, terminated a port call in Ensenada, Mexico planned for March 5 and ordered the cruise ship to return to San Francisco over concerns about the potential for an outbreak of coronavirus aboard the cruise ship.
Sixty-two passengers still aboard Grand Princess who may have made contact with the Placer County case that died earlier in the day were quarantined aboard the cruise ship at the request of the CDC.
In addition, eleven passengers and ten crew members were exhibiting potential symptoms of coronavirus, and Grand Princess was ordered by the state of California to remain offshore while test kits were being airlifted to the cruise ship.
Public health officials in Santa Clara County confirmed three new cases.
On March 5, the San Francisco Department of Public Health reported two community spread cases within the city.
The two cases are unrelated and both are hospitalized at different hospitals in San Francisco.
One patient is a man in his 90s with underlying health conditions, and the second patient is a woman in her 40s.
Neither of the patients recently traveled nor made contact with other coronavirus patients.
Six additional cases of coronavirus were reported in Santa Clara County, while six AT&T retail stores in San Diego were closed after an employee at one of the stores tested positive for coronavirus.
In addition, public health officials in Sunnyvale reported that the death of a 72-year-old man found unresponsive in his home was under investigation as a possible second death in California attributable to coronavirus after they subsequently learned from one of the man's family members that the man had been aboard the same Grand Princess cruise to Mexico linked to two other coronavirus cases in Sonoma and Placer Counties.In Alameda County, officials confirmed a second case on March 6, a former passenger of the  cruise ship Grand Princess.
Three new cases were reported in Contra Costa County, with two being former passengers on Grand Princess.
Three new cases were reported in Placer County; all were passengers on Grand Princess.
Four new cases were reported in Santa Clara County, bringing the county's total to 24.
In Sunnyvale, Lockheed Martin reported that one of its employees in its Sunnyvale office tested positive for coronavirus.
Yolo County reported its first case, through community transmission.
Eight new cases were reported in Santa Clara County, bringing the total number of cases in the county to 32.
A faculty member of the Stanford University School of Medicine has tested positive for coronavirus.
The faculty member stopped attending work after symptoms had appeared, and the member's place of work was closed for terminal cleaning.In Santa Cruz County, officials confirmed the county's first case, a former passenger of Grand Princess.
Six presumptive positive cases were reported in San Francisco.
All were reported as isolated at home in good condition.
Each patient had contact with a confirmed case.
In Elk Grove, a family tested positive and was quarantined, resulting in the closure of Elk Grove Unified School District for the week of March 7–13, including student activities and events.
In a letter to families, the school district announced no students or employees had tested positive.In Madera County, officials confirmed the county's first coronavirus case from a person who had been aboard Grand Princess.
Their spouse, whom they were with on the cruise, was also being monitored.
Both were taken to the Madera Community Hospital and were reported as in monitored isolation.
In Fresno County, two people returning from Grand Princess were quarantined and tested for the virus, with one person testing positive, making them the county's first confirmed case.
Contra Costa County reported 5 new cases on March 8.
Four of the patients did not travel or have known contact with a coronavirus case and are currently being treated at hospitals around the county.
The fifth person had contact with a previous case and is being isolated at home.
This brings the total number of confirmed cases in the county to nine.
Santa Clara County reported 5 new cases, bringing the total number of known cases in the county to 37.
In Rocklin, Sierra College announced all classes and lectures would be moved online by March 18 after two office staff members were quarantined following exposure to COVID-19, with students being tested.
In addition, the campus announced it would be limiting student activities, including continuing sporting events with no spectators.
Shasta County reported its first presumptive case.
A 50-year-old man with a history of recent travel was reported to be recovering in isolation at home.On March 9, three tested positive in Sacramento County.
Santa Clara County announced the state's second COVID-19 death.
A woman in her 60's was in the hospital for several weeks, she was the first confirmed case of COVID-19 in the county who had not traveled internationally or had contact with an already infected patient, which suggests it was a ‘community spread’ case.
The patient was also the third confirmed case reported in the county on February 28.
San Francisco reported five new cases, who each had known contact with an existing case.
The patients are isolated at home and are in good condition.
This brings the number of cases in San Francisco to 13.
Elementary aged child attending grammar school in Elk Grove tests positive for COVID-19.
On March 10, Governor Gavin Newsom announced 24 new cases of COVID-19 for a total of 157 confirmed cases in the state.
Alameda County reported its third confirmed case in the county.
The new case is the spouse of the second case, who was a passenger aboard Grand Princess.
The new patient had already been quarantined at home and remains isolated.
San Francisco reports a new case in a patient who had known contact with a confirmed case, bringing the total number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the city to 14 with 89 confirmed cases in the Bay Area.
The patient of the new case is currently hospitalized.
The city announces a ban on large gatherings and relief for small businesses A resident of an assisted living home in Elk Grove in Sacramento County tested positive from complications of the virus.
County health officials said they have the capacity to only test 20 people per day and would be focusing all their efforts on the other residents of the retirement home.
That resident died from complications of the virus on the same day.
Ventura County confirms its first case of COVID-19.Marin County reported two new cases on March 11, bringing the total number of confirmed cases in the county to three.
The two cases lived with the first confirmed case, who was a passenger on Grand Princess.
The pair have been isolated in their home and are experiencing mild symptoms that do not require hospitalization.
A woman who was in her 60s and had underlying medical conditions died in Los Angeles County.
She was not a resident of Los Angeles and had traveled extensively, including a long layover in South Korea.
Her death is the first in Los Angeles County and the fourth in California.
San Jose International Airport reported that three of its TSA agents have tested positive.
All three agents worked in Terminal B, and 42 TSA agents have been quarantined.
A firefighter in the city of Alameda tested positive for coronavirus and is being quarantined.
Alameda County confirmed four additional cases on March 12, bringing the total number to seven.
Two of the four new cases are the first community-spread cases in the county, and the other two cases are linked to confirmed cases.
San Francisco reported four new cases, bringing the total of confirmed cases to 18.
Two of the new cases are hospitalized and the other two are isolated at home.
One of the patients had close contact with a confirmed case, while the other three did not recently travel to a country with coronavirus cases and did not have close contact with a confirmed patient.
Four firefighters with the San Jose Fire Department tested positive for the coronavirus.
The sick firefighters also have multiple family members who have tested positive for COVID-19.San Joaquin County reported 5 more cases on March 13, increasing the number to 8.
The San Joaquin County Department of Public Health declared a Public Health Emergency, causing all schools within the county to close until April 6.
Santa Clara County reported 13 more cases, bringing the county's total to 79.
Health officials also announced the second coronavirus death in Santa Clara County; the patient was a woman in her 80s who was hospitalized on March 9.
In San Jose, a fourth TSA agent at Mineta International Airport tested positive for COVID-19 and two additional firefighters have also tested positive, bringing the total number of San Jose Firefighters with the virus to six.
As a result, 70 other firefighters are being monitored after possible exposure to the virus.
Stanford University confirmed an undergraduate student has tested positive for the coronavirus; the student is self-isolating.
Los Angeles County reported eight new cases, bringing their total to 40.
San Diego County reported a total of eleven cases Contra Costa County updated their total to 25 cases.
Santa Clara County reported 17 new cases, bringing the total in the county to 91.
San Francisco reported five new cases, bringing the total to 28, and issued an order forbidding visitors to hospitals.
Two additional cases of coronavirus have been confirmed in Marin County, bringing the total number to five.
The two new cases had no known exposure to other cases, and are believed to be a result of community spread — the first in the county.
The two people are quarantined at home and will remain in quarantine until they are no longer infected.
A U.C.
Berkeley graduate student has tested positive for the novel coronavirus.
The student doesn't live on campus or in the city of Berkeley; they have self-isolated at home and the person is in good condition with no serious symptoms.San Luis Obispo County has confirmed its first coronavirus case a day after the county has both declared a public health emergency and closed down its schools.
The patient is from North County (Atascadero, Templeton, and Paso Robles) and is currently recovering in isolation.
Sonoma County reported its first case of community spread virus, bringing their total cases to three.
Los Angeles County reported eleven new cases, bringing their total to 53.
San Francisco reported 9 new cases, bringing their total to 37.
Two health workers at UC San Francisco have tested positive for the coronavirus; they have been self-quarantined.
San Mateo County reported its first coronavirus related death; the total number of confirmed cases in the county is 32.
Santa Clara County reported 23 new cases, bringing the total in the county to 114.Santa Barbara and San Bernardino Counties reported their first confirmed cases.
San Luis Obispo County has received their second case confirmed case after the County Public Health Laboratory conducted over 100 tests for COVID-19 last week.
The patient is currently in isolation at home.
Los Angeles County reported sixteen new cases, bringing their total to 69.
San Diego County updated their total to 33 cases.
San Mateo County reported 10 new cases, increasing their total to 41, and Alameda County reported 8 new cases, bringing their total to 18.
Santa Clara County reported 24 new cases, bringing their total to 138.
San Francisco reported 3 new cases, bringing their total to 40.
Los Angeles County reported 25 new cases, bringing their total to 94.
San Diego County updated their total to 55 cases and Contra Costa County updated theirs to 34 cases.
Nevada County Public Health reports first confirmed case of COVID-19.
The person recently traveled outside the country, and at the time of this report, it appears the disease was acquired during international travel, but authorities were still in the earliest stages of investigation.
San Joaquin County reported 13 cases.
San Francisco County reported 3 new cases, bringing their total to 43;  Los Angeles County reported 50 new cases, bringing their total to 144; Alameda County reported 8 new cases, bringing their total to 27; Santa Clara County reported 17 new cases, bringing their total to 155; San Mateo county reported 23 new cases, bringing their total to 64; Contra Costa County reported 5 new cases, bringing their total to 39.
Sacramento County reported 40 confirmed cases and two deaths.
Orange County reported 22 total cases.
Riverside County reported 15 total cases and 3 deaths.
Monterey County announced their first two cases.
San Luis Obispo reported 3 new cases, bringing their total to 6.
Los Angeles County increased to 190, San Mateo increased to 80, San Diego County increased to 75, San Francisco County increased to 51, Contra Costa increased to 41, Alameda County increased to 31, Orange County increased to 42, Riverside County increased to 16, and San Joaquin County increased to 14 confirmed cases.
Ventura County reported 13 cases.
Mendocino County announced its first case.
Los Angeles County increased to 231, Santa Clara County increased to 189, San Mateo increased to 89, San Francisco County increased to 70, Orange County increased to 53, Sacramento County increased to 45, Contra Costa increased to 42, Alameda County increased to 35, San Joaquin County increased to 15, and Santa Cruz County increased to 14 cases.
Los Angeles County increased to 292, Santa Clara County increased to 196, San Mateo County increased to 100, San Diego County increased to 120 San Francisco County increased to 76, Orange County increased to 65, Sacramento County increased to 53 cases with 3 deaths, Contra Costa County increased to 46, Alameda County increased to 45, Marin County increased to 38, Riverside County increased to 28, San Joaquin County increased to 20, Ventura County increased to 17, Santa Cruz County increased to 15, San Luis Obispo reported 16, Santa Barbara reported 9 cases, San Bernadino reported 9 cases, Yolo increased to 6 cases, and Fresno County reported 6 cases including their first person-to-person transmission.
Santa Clara County increased to 263, San Mateo County increased to 110, San Francisco increased to 84,, Orange County increased to 78, Alameda County increased to 65, Contra Costa County increased to 51, San Joaquin County increased to 25 cases,, San Luis Obispo increased to 21, Solano County reported 13 cases, Tulare County reported 11 cases,, and Placer County reported 12 cases with 1 death.
San Francisco increased to 105, Alameda County increased to 100.
On February 10, Santa Clara County declared a local health emergency that would allow health authorities to deploy rapid response in the event of a potential coronavirus case.
The state of emergency would be in effect for 30 days.
On February 14, San Diego County declared a local health emergency to ensure that the county had the resources needed to respond to the infections.
The state of emergency lasted for seven days.On February 25, the mayor of San Francisco, London Breed, declared a state of emergency that would allow city officials to assemble resources and personnel to expedite emergency measures in the event of a potential coronavirus case in the city.
On February 26, Orange County declared a local health emergency to raise awareness and accelerate emergency planning.
On February 27, Solano County declared a local health emergency to bolster response to COVID-19 cases.
California Governor Gavin Newsom announced that, as of February 27, the number of people being monitored for the virus in California amounted to 8,400.
The same day, "Newsom said the state was limited in how many people it could test because it only had 200 testing kits."
On March 3, Placer County declared a public health emergency, following the confirmation of a second coronavirus case in that county.
On March 4, Governor Newsom declared a state of emergency after the first death in California attributable to coronavirus occurred in Placer County.On March 7, a family in Elk Grove contracted the virus and was quarantined which led to the school district of Elk Grove decision to close down all schools until March 13.
On March 8, Riverside County declared a public health emergency with a case being treated at Eisenhower Health in Rancho Mirage.On March 9, Santa Clara County announced that beginning March 11, public gatherings with more than 1,000 people would be banned for a three-week period.
On March 10, a resident of a retirement home tested positive in Elk Grove in Sacramento County.
County health officials said that they had the capacity to only test 20 people per day and would be focusing all their efforts on the other residents of the retirement home.
That resident died from complications of the virus on the same day.
Also on March 10, a woman became the first presumptive case of the novel coronavirus in San Diego County, who was being treated at Scripps Green Hospital, with verification of the test results pending from the CDC.
The infection was related to overseas travel; she had not been subjected to a 14-day quarantine upon return, indicating that she did not come from one of the "high risk" countries at the time of her return.On March 12, Governor Newsom announced that mass gatherings over 250 people were banned until the end of March.
He also issued an order to permit the state to commandeer hotels and medical facilities to treat coronavirus patients.
On March 13, schools were closed in Marin, Sacramento, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, Santa Clara, Solano, Placer, and Contra Costa counties, as well as the Oakland, Antioch, Santa Cruz, Los Angeles Unified, Chaffey Unified, Etiwanda, Fontana Unified, Ontario-Montclair, Alta Loma Unified, San Diego, Los Alamitos Unified, and Washington Unified school districts.
In Santa Clara county, all gatherings of 100 or more people were banned, and gatherings of 35 or more people were banned unless they satisfied public health restrictions.
On March 15, Governor Newsom called for voluntary closure of bars and in-home self-isolation of seniors 65 and older, as well as persons at-risk due to underlying conditions.
On March 16, the health officers of Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara counties announced, with the City of Berkeley, a legal order directing their respective residents to shelter in place for three weeks beginning midnight March 17 to April 7 in order to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
The order limited activity, travel and business functions to only the most essential needs.
The same day, the county of Santa Cruz issued a similar shelter in place order.On March 17, more counties issued shelter in place orders, including Monterey County (until April 4), San Benito (until April 7), and Sonoma (until April 7).
Sacramento County issued a stay-at-home directive, which, unlike a shelter in place order, is not a legal requirement.
The federal Defense Secretary said the military would provide up to 5 million respirator masks and also 2,000 ventilators from its reserve.
On March 18, shelter in place orders were issued by Yolo County (until April 7), the city of Fresno (until March 31), Napa County (effective March 20, until April 7) San Luis Obispo County (until April 17), and Mendocino County (until April 7).On March 19, Sacramento County upgraded its stay-at-home directive into an official order that carries legal consequences.
Governor Newsom then announced a statewide stay-at-home order.
Governor Newsom said that the state has asked the Department of Defense to deploy the Navy's USNS Mercy hospital ship in California to assist potentially overwhelmed counties with acute patient care.On March 21, the Strategic National Stockpile Division of the United States Department of Health and Human Services converted the Santa Clara Convention Center into a Federal Medical Station to receive noncritical patients from local hospitals.
For tabular data, see the following resources:
COVID-19 Cases in Santa Clara County, CA
This is a partial list (by A-Z) of major businesses and government offices in California with  temporary cancellation or closure.
California Academy of Sciences in San Francisco - closed from March 12 until the end of March.
California's Great America in Santa Clara - closed from March 13 until at the end of March.
California State University, Monterey Bay - All classes suspended from March 13 to March 23.
All classes moved to remote instruction until the end of the semester.
City College of San Francisco - All campuses closed from March 13 and all classes moving to remote instruction indefinitely.
de Young Museum in San Francisco - closed from March 14.
The Exploratorium in San Francisco - closed from March 12 to the end of March.
Fremont Unified School District - closed from March 13 through April 7.
Los Rios Community College District in Sacramento - All campuses closed from March 13 and all classes moving to remote instruction indefinitely.
Monterey Bay Aquarium in Monterey - closed from March 13 until at least March 27.
Sacramento State - On March 12, all classes were moved to remote instruction until the end of the semester.
The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (SFMOMA) - closed from March 14 to March 28.
San Jose State University - all courses moved to online instruction through end of Spring 2020 Semester.
Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in Vallejo - closed from March 13 until at the end of March.
Stanford University - closed from March 10 through the end of spring quarter; all classes moved to remote instruction.
The Tech Interactive in San Jose - closed from 12 through March 31.
UC Berkeley in Berkeley, California - Closed from March 10 through the end of spring semester.
UC Davis - as of March 14, all classes moved to remote instruction, students allowed to stay on campus.
UC Santa Cruz - all classes moved to remote instruction and students encouraged to return to primary residence and attend through remote instruction until the end of the spring quarter.
Campus remains open.
The Walt Disney Family Museum in San Francisco was closed on March 6 after an employee's relative tested positive for COVID-19.
The museum was closed and has planned to reopen on March 20.
Seven of the largest ski areas around Lake Tahoe were closed on March 14, including Northstar, Heavenly, Kirkwood, Squaw Valley, Alpine Meadows, Sugarbowl, and Mammoth Mountain
Arcadia Community Center & Arcadia Public Library in Arcadia, California- Closed March 13 to April 30, 2020.
Burbank Unified School District in Burbank, California- Closed March 16 to 27, 2020.
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California - Closed March 15 to April 6, 2020 for all public events on campus have been canceled, postponed, or made virtual and all athletic contests and practices.
Classes resume on March 30.
California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo, California - Extended spring break until April 6, and announced that the first two weeks of spring quarter will be held online.
All spring events are cancelled.
California State University San Marcos - All face-to-face classes moved online starting March 20 for the duration of the Spring 2020 semester.
All CSUSM sponsored events cancelled between March 16 and April 30, 2020.
Campus remains open, but in a state of reduced operation.
Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, California - Closed on March 14 to end of March 2020.
Knott's Berry Farm in Buena Park, California - Closed March 13 to mid-May 2020.
La Sierra University in Riverside, California - Closed March 15 to April 30.
Legoland California in Carlsbad, California - Closed from March 15 to 31.
Los Angeles Convention Center in Los Angeles, California - All events canceled or postponed due to LA mayor's ban of events of 50+ March 12 to 31, 2020.
Los Angeles Unified School District in Los Angeles, California - Closed March 16 to unknown end date.
Orange Unified School District in Orange, California - Students are dismissed  March 16 to 27, 2020.
Pasadena Unified School District - students will be dismissed on March 16, 2020.
Closed for students March 17 through April 5, 2020.
San Diego Unified School District - Closed from March 16 until April 6.
San Diego Zoo in San Diego - Closed from March 16 to April 1.
Sea World San Diego in San Diego - Closed from March 15 to 31.
Six Flags Magic Mountain in Los Angeles -  Closed from March 13 to April 1.
Southwestern College - Classes moved online until March 30.
Sweetwater Union High School District - Closed from March 16 until April 3.
UCLA in Los Angeles, California - Classes moved online until the end of spring quarter, with students encouraged to return home if possible.
Campus remains open.
UC Irvine in Irvine, California - All classes moved to remote instruction and students encouraged to return to primary residence and attend through remote instruction.
Campus remains operational.
UCSD in San Diego, California - Lectures and discussions moved online for the duration of spring quarter; labs and studios will continue to meet in person.
Sporting events will be held behind closed doors.
UCSB in Santa Barbara, California - All classes moved to remote instruction initially through the end of April, then through the entire spring quarter.
Students living in university-owned housing encouraged to return home.
Campus remains open.
UC Riverside in Riverside, California - All classes moved to remote instruction for the entire spring quarter.
On campus housing and dining will remain open.
Universal Studios Hollywood in Los Angeles - Closed from March 14 to 31.
The Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and its sister event, the Stagecoach Festival, were originally scheduled to take place on April 10–12, April 17–19, and April 24–26, but on March 10, Goldenvoice announced that it was rescheduling both Coachella and Stagecoach to October due to health concerns over the coronavirus pandemic.
The promoter made the decision "at the direction of the County of Riverside and local health authorities".
The new dates for Coachella 2020 are October 9–11 and October 16–18.
CIF state basketball championships were cancelled
USC spring football was cancelled
The Los Angeles Philharmonic, Los Angeles Opera and Center Theatre Group cancelled performances and festivals
Electronic Entertainment Expo 2020 (E3) was cancelled
RuPaul's DragCon LA 2020 was cancelled
The Game Developers' Conference (GDC) in San Francisco, originally scheduled for March 16–20, was postponed to summer
Google Cloud Next '20 was converted to online format
The Facebook F8 Conference was converted to online format
Google I/O, originally May 12–14, cancelled
The Indian Wells Masters tennis tournament has been cancelled for this year.
WonderCon was postponed.
BottleRock Napa Valley 2020 was postponed to October 2–4.
Bay to Breakers 2020 was postponed to September 20.
Most of state's sports teams were affected.
In Major League Baseball cancelled the remainder of spring training on March 12, and on March 16, they announced that the season will be postponed indefinitely, after the recommendations from the CDC to restrict events of more than 50 people for the next eight weeks, affecting the Los Angeles Dodgers, Los Angeles Angels, San Francisco Giants, Oakland Athletics, and San Diego Padres.
In the National Basketball Association, the season was suspended for 30 days starting on March 12, affecting the Los Angeles Lakers, Los Angeles Clippers, Sacramento Kings, and Golden State Warriors.
Also on March 12, the National Hockey League suspended the season indefinitely, affecting the Los Angeles Kings, Anaheim Ducks, and San Jose Sharks.
The Major League Soccer season was suspended for 30 days starting on March 12, affecting the LA Galaxy, Los Angeles FC, and San Jose Earthquakes.Also on March 12, the National Collegiate Athletic Association cancelled all winter and spring tournaments, most notably the Division I men's and women's basketball tournaments, affecting colleges and universities statewide.
On March 16, the National Junior College Athletic Association also canceled the remainder of the winter seasons as well as the spring seasons.At the high school level, the California Interscholastic Federation, or CIF, canceled the basketball state championship tournament after the Northern California and Southern California semifinals.
During the tournament, 3 schools including Sheldon,
Archbishop Riordan, and the Menlo School withdrew from the tournament after their schools were shut down.
Currently, spring sports for high schools have all been postponed until at least April 7.
The CIF will be reevaluating and giving a further directive on April 3.
This includes the sports of baseball, softball, badminton, track and field, swimming, boys golf and boys tennis.
Alameda County: On March 20, Alameda County officials announced that 247 people would be released from Santa Rita Jail, located in Dublin.
San Diego County: On March 16, the Sheriff's Department said it had started reducing the number of people being accepted into the county's seven jails and had received approval for early release of some prisoners.
Other measures included in-cell meals, a suspension of visitation, and suspension of jail programs.
On March 13, the Roman Catholic Diocese of San Jose in California closed all diocesan schools from until at least April 20.
It suspended public Masses and dispensed with the obligation to attend Mass from March 14 until further notice.
On March 18, the California Catholic Conference of bishops followed suit, suspending the public celebration of Mass throughout the state until further notice.
2020 coronavirus pandemic in the United States
Travel restrictions related to the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic
California CDPH Office of Public Affairs, news releases by California Department of Public Health (CDPH)
Governor Newsom Issues New Executive Order Further Enhancing State and Local Government's Ability to Respond to COVID-19 Pandemic (March 12, 2020) - Cancel large gatherings more than 250 people
A COVID-19 vaccine is a hypothetical vaccine against coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Although no vaccine has completed clinical trials, there are multiple attempts in progress to develop such a vaccine.
In late February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) said it did not expect a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2, the causative virus, to become available in less than 18 months.
By early March 2020, some 30 vaccine candidates were in development.
Vaccines have been produced against several diseases caused by coronaviruses for animal use, including for infectious bronchitis virus in birds, canine coronavirus and feline coronavirus.Previous efforts to develop vaccines for viruses in the family Coronaviridae that affect humans have been aimed at severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Vaccines against SARS and MERS have been tested in non-human animal models.
As of 2020, there is no cure or protective vaccine for SARS that has been shown to be both safe and effective in humans.
According to research papers published in 2005 and 2006, the identification and development of novel vaccines and medicines to treat SARS is a priority for governments and public health agencies around the world.There is also no proven vaccine against MERS.
When MERS became prevalent, it was believed that existing SARS research may provide a useful template for developing vaccines and therapeutics against a MERS-CoV infection.
As of March 2020, there was one (DNA based) MERS vaccine which completed phase I clinical trials in humans, and three others in progress, all of which are viral vectored vaccines, two adenoviral-vectored (ChAdOx1-MERS,  BVRS-GamVac), and one MVA-vectored (MVA-MERS-S).
SARS-CoV-2 was identified on 1 December 2019 as the cause of what would later be named COVID-19.
A major outbreak spread around the world in 2020, leading to considerable investment and research activity to develop a vaccine.
Many organizations are using published genomes to develop possible vaccines against SARS-CoV-2.
About 35 companies and academic institutions are involved, with three of them receiving support from the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), including projects by the biotechnology companies Moderna, and Inovio Pharmaceuticals, and the University of Queensland.
Some 300 clinical studies are in progress, as of March 2020.
The US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) collaborated with Moderna to develop an RNA vaccine matching a spike of the coronavirus surface.
In February 2020, NIAID registered a Phase 1 safety clinical trial of the vaccine, called mRNA-1273, open for recruitment in Seattle, WA.
On 16 March 2020, the human study began.
Seattle woman Jennifer Haller volunteered to be the first person to be injected with mRNA-1273.
In Australia, the University of Queensland is investigating the potential of a molecular clamp vaccine that would genetically modify viral proteins in order to stimulate an immune reaction.
In Canada, the International Vaccine Centre (VIDO-InterVac), University of Saskatchewan, received federal funding to work on a vaccine, aiming to start non-human animal testing in March 2020 and human testing in 2021.
Efforts have been announced at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and the University of Hong Kong.
Around 29 January 2020, Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies began work on developing a vaccine.
Janssen is codeveloping an oral vaccine with its biotechnology partner, Vaxart.
On 18 March 2020, Emergent BioSolutions announced a manufacturing partnership with Vaxart to develop the vaccine.
Inovio Pharmaceuticals is developing a DNA-based vaccination in collaboration with a Chinese firm, announcing plans for human clinical trials in the summer of the Northern Hemisphere of 2020.
The Jenner Institute of the University of Oxford developed a vaccine candidate based on a chimp adenovirus vector and signed a manufacturing contract with Advent.
They announced plans to start animal trials at Porton Down in March 2020 and human safety trials the following month.
Washington University in St. Louis
On 5 March 2020, the United States Army Medical Research and Materiel Command at Fort Detrick and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in Silver Spring, both in western Maryland, announced they were working on a vaccine.
Emergent Biosolutions teamed with Novavax Inc.
in the development and manufacture of a vaccine.
The partners announced plans for preclinical testing and a Phase I clinical trial by July 2020.
On 12 March 2020, India's Health Ministry announced they are working with 11 isolates and that even on a fast track it would take at least around one-and-a-half to two years to develop a vaccine.
On 16 March 2020, the European Commission offered an €80 million investment in CureVac, a German biotechnology company, to develop a mRNA vaccine.
Earlier that week, The Guardian had reported the US President Donald Trump offered CureVac "'large sums of money' for exclusive access to a Covid-19 vaccine", with the German government contesting this effort.
On 17 March 2020, American pharmaceutical company Pfizer announced a partnership with German company BioNTech to jointly develop a mRNA-based vaccine.
On 20 March, Russian health officials said that scientists will start animal tests with six different vaccine candidates.
The vaccines will be tested on ferrets and primates.
Social media posts have promoted a conspiracy theory claiming the virus behind COVID-19 was known and that a vaccine was already available.
The patents cited by various social media posts reference existing patents for genetic sequences and vaccines for other strains of coronavirus such as the SARS coronavirus.
Coronavirus disease 2019
2019–20 coronavirus outbreak
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus
Respiratory disease
Phases of clinical research
DRAFT landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines  – 4 March 2020
COVID-19 testing
Laboratory testing for the respiratory illness coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and the associated SARS-CoV-2 virus includes methods that detect the presence of virus and those that detect antibodies produced in response to infection.
Detection of antibodies (serology) can be used both for clinical purposes, including in China confirmation of recovery, and population surveillance.
Due to limited testing, as of March 2020, no countries had reliable data on the prevalence of the virus in their population.
Using real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) the test can be done on respiratory samples obtained by various methods, including nasopharyngeal swab or sputum sample.
Results are generally available within a few hours to 2 days.
Molecular methods leverage polymerase chain reaction (PCR) along with nucleic acid tests, and other advanced analytical techniques, to detect the genetic material of the virus using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction for diagnostic purposes.
One of the early PCR tests was developed at Charité in Berlin in January 2020 using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR), and formed the basis of 250,000 kits for distribution by the World Health Organization (WHO).The South Korean company Kogenebiotech developed a clinical grade, PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 detection kit (PowerChek Coronavirus) on 28 January 2020.
It looks for the "E" gene shared by all beta coronaviruses, and the RdRp gene specific to SARS-CoV-2.
Other companies in the country, such as Solgent and Seegene, also developed versions of clinical grade detection kits, named DiaPlexQ and Allplex 2019-nCoV Assay, respectively, in February 2020.
In China, BGI Group was one of the first companies to receive emergency use approval from China's National Medical Products Administration for a PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 detection kit.In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is distributing the CDC 2019-Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel to public health labs through the International Reagent Resource.
One of three genetic tests in older versions of the test kits caused inconclusive results due to faulty reagents, and a bottleneck of testing at the CDC in Atlanta; this resulted in an average of less than 100 samples a day being successfully processed throughpout the whole of February 2020.
Tests using two components were not determined to be reliable until 28 February 2020, and it was not until then that
state and local laboratories were permitted to begin testing.
The test was approved by the Food and Drug Administration under an Emergency Use Authorization.
US commercial labs began testing in early March 2020.
As of 5 March 2020 LabCorp announced nationwide availability of COVID-19 testing based on RT-PCR.
Quest Diagnostics similarly made nationwide COVID-19 testing available as of 9 March 2020.
No quantity limitations were announced; specimen collection and processing must be performed according to CDC requirements.
In the Russia, the COVID-19 test was developed and produced by the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology VECTOR.
On 11 February 2020 the test was registered by the Federal Service for Surveillance in Healthcare.On 12 March 2020, Mayo Clinic was reported to have developed a test to detect COVID-19 infection.On 13 March 2020, Roche Diagnostics received FDA approval for a test which could be performed within 3.5 hours, thus allowing one machine to do approximately 4,128 tests in a 24-hour period.On 19 March 2020, the FDA issued emergency use authorization (EUA) to Abbott Laboratories for a test on Abbott's m2000 system; the FDA had previously issued similar authorization to Hologic, LabCorp, and Thermo Fisher Scientific.
On 21 March 2020, Cepheid Inc similarly received EUA from the FDA for a test that takes ~45 minutes.A test which uses a monoclonal antibody which specifically binds to the nucleocapsid protein (N protein) of the novel coronavirus is being developed in Taiwan, with the hope that it can provide results within 15 to 20 minutes just like a rapid influenza test.
The response to infection includes the production of antibodies including IgM and IgG.
These can be used to detect infection in individuals, to determine immunity, and in population surveillance.
There is a lot of experience of this approach in other conditions.
Assays can be performed in central laboratories (CLT) or by point-of-care testing (PoCT).
The high-throughput automated systems in many clinical laboratories will be able to perform these assays but their availability will depend on the rate of production for each proprietary system.
For CLT a single specimen of peripheral blood is commonly used, although serial specimens can be used to follow the immune response.
For PoCT a single specimen of blood is usually obtained by skin puncture.
Unlike PCR methods an extraction step is not needed before assay.
A blood test to detect antibodies produced by the body as a result of an infection is being developed as of March 9, 2020.
It will allow the determination of whether a person has ever been infected and will work regardless of whether the person developed symptoms.
It is hoped that it can return results in 15 minutes by detecting both IgM and IgG antibodies.
Chest CT scans can sometimes help identify and characterize lung pathology, and have yielded non-specific findings with COVID-19 infection.
A systematic review of chest CT scan findings in 919 patients described the typical early manifestation of COVID-19 as "bilateral multilobar ground-glass opacification (GGO) with a peripheral or posterior distribution".
One study found that the sensitivity of CT for COVID-19 infection was 98% compared to RT-PCR sensitivity of 71%; however, this was performed in Wuhan province of China and is not generalizable.
Most common CT scan findings were bilateral ground-glass attenuation (patchy or diffuse) with subpleural dominance, crazy paving and consolidations at later stages.
These findings are nonspecific and found as well in other types of pneumonia.
A small study showed that Chinese radiologists demonstrated 72-94% sensitivity and 24-94% in differentiating COVID-19 from other types of viral pneumonia using CT imaging.
No study yet has validated the accuracy and discriminatory value of CT scans to distinguish COVID from other viral pneumonia.
Therefore, the CDC does not recommend CT for initial screening, as emphasized in the Clinician Outreach and Communication Activity (COCA) call on Thursday, 5 March.
People with suspected COVID should be tested with RT-PCR, which is the most specific test.
Hong Kong has set up a scheme where suspected patients can stay home, "emergency department will give a specimen tube to the patient", they spit into it, send it back and get a test result a while after.The British NHS has announced that it will start testing suspected cases at home, which removes the risk of a patient infecting others if they come to a hospital or having to disinfect an ambulance if one is used.In drive-through testing for COVID-19 for suspected cases, a healthcare professional takes sample using appropriate precautions.
Drive-through centers have helped South Korea do some of the fastest, most-extensive testing of any country.
China and the United States had problems with the reliability of test kits early in the outbreak, and these countries and Australia were unable to supply enough kits to satisfy demand and recommendations for testing by health experts.
In contrast, experts say South Korea's broad availability of testing helped reduce the spread of the novel coronavirus.
Testing capacity, largely in private sector labs, was built up over several years by the South Korean government.
On 16 March, the World Health Organization called for ramping up the testing programmes as the best way to slow the advance of Covid-19 pandemic."Testing has to happen, it is the priority.
The problem is low-income countries are probably arriving on the third wave, after China, after Europe.
Access to tests is going to be problematic," said Karl Blanchet, director of the Centre for Education and Research in Humanitarian Action.
While many richer countries were currently focused on their own populations and economies, the humanitarian community would have to look at changing the way it works, by investing in the strengthening of worldwide public health systems rather than focusing on single-issue campaigns.
COVID-19 drug repurposing research
Coronavirus disease 2019
2019–20 coronavirus outbreak
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus
Respiratory disease
Phases of clinical research
COVID-19 Testing (at least) - now Free for all?
(CDC; US Congress; CSPAN video/6:00; March 12, 2020)
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Europe
Countries in Europe have been affected by COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus responsible for the 2019–20 pandemic first recorded in Wuhan, China.
As of 17 March 2020, all countries within Europe had a confirmed case of COVID-19, with Montenegro the last European country to report at least one case.
In 18 countries, at least one death has been reported.
Europe is now considered the active centre of COVID-19 according to the World Health Organization as of 13 March 2020.
As of 13 March 2020, cases by country across Europe had doubled over periods of typically 3 to 4 days, with some countries (mostly those at earlier stages of detection) showing doubling every 2 days.
As of 17 March 2020, there have been 2,740 reported deaths in the EU/EEA and UK from COVID-19.On 13 March 2020, the following COVID-19 related risks were assessed by the ECDC:
Counting of cases are subject to the number of tested people.
On 8 March, Albania confirmed its first two coronavirus cases, a father and son who had travelled from Florence, Italy.
On 12 March, the total number of confirmed cases rose to 42.
On 2 March, Andorra confirmed its first coronavirus case, a 20-year-old man who had returned from Milan.
On 25 February Austria confirmed its first two cases, a 24-year-old man and a 24-year-old woman from Lombardy, Italy who were treated at a hospital in Innsbruck.As of 13 March there were 422 confirmed cases in Austria.
On 28 February Belarus confirmed its first case.
A student from Iran tested positive on 27 February and was admitted to hospital in Minsk.
The individual arrived in Belarus via a flight from Baku, Azerbaijan, on 22 February.As of 4 March 6 cases in total were confirmed.
Four cases in Minsk, two cases in Vitebsk.
On 4 February, Belgium confirmed the first case.
The patient, an asymptomatic 54-year-old male was one of nine Belgians repatriated from China.
All of them were quarantined at Saint-Pierre Hospital in Brussels.As of 14 March 689 cases were confirmed in Belgium with 4 deaths.
On 5 March, health officials from Republika Srpska confirmed the first two cases in the country, a father and son returning from Italy.By 13 March five new cases had been identified with a maximum of 18, where 15 are located in RS and 3 are in FBiH.
On 8 March, Bulgaria confirmed its first two cases, a 27-year-old man from Pleven and a 75-year-old woman from Gabrovo.
Neither of the two had traveled to areas with known Coronavirus cases.
The man tested positive for the virus after being hospitalized for a respitarory infection, and authorities announced plans to test several people who were in contact with the two individuals.
Two other samples in Pleven and Gabrovo were positive on 8 March.
After the number of patients in the country has reached 23, the Bulgarian Parliament has voted unanimously to declare a state of emergency from 13 March until 13 April.
Another death case was confirmed by Bulgarian Ministry of Health on 14 March.
On 25 February, Croatia confirmed its first case, a 26-year-old man who had been in Milan, Italy.
On 26 February, two new cases were confirmed, one being the twin brother of the first.As of 8 March, there were twelve confirmed cases in Croatia.On 22 March a large earthquake (5.5 on the Richter scale) has hit the Croatian capital of Zagreb, just before 06:30 AM (CET) and was followed by multiple smaller earthquakes (second 5.0 and third 3.7 on the Richter scale).
The earthquake could also be felt across much of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Hungary, Slovenia, and Austria.
It was the strongest earthquake in Zagreb since the 1880 earthquake.
On 9 March, Cyprus confirmed its first 2 cases, one in Nicosia and one in Limassol.
The first case was reported in the country on 1 March.
As of 22 March, there have been 1120 confirmed cases with 1 lethal outcome.On 12 March, the Czech Republic declared a 30-day state of emergency and barred entry to non-residents from China, South Korea, Iran, Italy, Spain, Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, UK, Norway, Denmark and France.
On 27 February, Denmark confirmed its first case.As of 16 March, there have been 898 confirmed cases in Denmark, including 11 in the Faroe Islands (see below).Numerous preventive measures gradually were implemented.
Starting on 13 March, schools, universities and similar places will be closed for two weeks, while most people in non-essential public sector functions have been sent home to work.
On 14 March, the borders were closed.Denmark's borders are closed until 13 April.
Danish citizens and transporters of goods will still be allowed entry.
On 4 March, the Faroe Islands had its first confirmed case.
As of 16 March, there are 11 confirmed cases in the Faroe Islands.
On 27 February Estonia confirmed its first case, an Iranian citizen, travelling from Iran via Turkey.As of 11 March there were 17 confirmed cases in Estonia.
12 of them had returned with the infection from Northern Italy, one from France, one from Iran and one from undisclosed risk area.
First two cases of virus transmitting locally were in Saaremaa after international volleyball competition involving a team from Milan.From 12 March the virus was spreading locally.
The number of infected grew fast reaching 109 on 14 March.
The first case was reported in the country on 28 January.
On 24 January, the first case in Europe was confirmed in Bordeaux.
Two more cases were confirmed in Paris by the end of the day, all of them originated from China.
A cluster of infections was discovered in Haute-Savoie which originated from a British national who had visited Singapore.From 31 January to 9 February, nearly 550 people were repatriated from Wuhan on a series of evacuation flights arriving at Creil Air Base in Oise and Istres-Le Tubé Air Base in Istres.On 14 February, an 80-year-old Chinese tourist died in Hôpital Bichat, Paris, marking the first death from COVID-19 in Europe and France.On 12 March, president of France Emmanuel Macron announced on public television that all schools and all universities would close from Monday 16 March until further notice.
The next day, the prime minister Édouard Philippe banned gatherings of more than 100 people, not including public transportation.
The following day, the prime minister ordered the closure of all nonessential public places, including restaurants, cafés, cinemas, and discothèques, effective at midnight.As of 14 March, there had been 4,499 confirmed cases (a near-four-fold increase over the number 5 days previously), and 91 deaths in France.As of 20 March, the number of confirmed cases had risen to 12,612, while the number of deaths reached 450.
On 27 January, the first case was confirmed in Germany.
The majority of cases in January and early February originated from Webasto headquarters in Bavaria.
A total of 14 employees and family members tested positive and were treated at Schwabing Hospital in Munich.By 14 March, the number of confirmed infections had increased to 4,585, including 9 fatalities.
The territory confirmed its first case on 4 March.
On 26 February, the first case in Greece was confirmed, a 38-year-old woman from Thessaloniki who had recently visited Northern Italy.
The next day, the first patient's 9-year-old child and another 40-year-old woman, who had travelled to Italy, also tested positive.On 6 March the number of known cases rose to 45.
Schools, universities, theatres and cinemas will remain closed, and sport events take place without any spectators, in three affected areas (Achaea, Elis, and Zakynthos) until 22 March.By 12 March, there were 133 confirmed cases in Greece.
The first confirmed death from COVID-19 in Greece was a 66-year-old man, who died on 12 March.
On 9 March, The first case in the crown dependency was confirmed.
On 4 March Prime Minister Viktor Orbán announced that two Iranian students had been infected with the virus.
The students are asymptomatic and have been transported to Saint Ladislaus Hospital in Budapest.
The first case was confirmed in Iceland on 28 February, an Icelandic male in his forties who had been on a ski trip to Andalo in Northern Italy and returned home on 22 February.Iceland's Department of Civil Protection and Emergency Management declared a state of emergency on 6 March after the two cases of community transmission in Iceland were confirmed, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 43.
On 13 March, it was announced at an official press conference that a 4-week ban on public gatherings of more than 100 persons would be put into effect as of Monday 16 March.
Universities and secondary schools will be closed for 4 weeks.
International airports and harbours will remain exempt from these measures.
The National Public Health Emergency Team of Ireland announced that a case in Ireland has been confirmed on 29 February.
Response to the outbreak has included cancellation of St Patrick's Day parades and all festivals.
On 12 March, all schools, universities and childcare institutes were closed until 29 March.
On 20 March emergency legislation was signed into law by Michael D. Higgins giving the state permission to detain people, restrict travel and keep people in their homes to help combat the spread of the pandemic.As of 20 March there has been 683 cases and three deaths.
On 31 January, the first two cases were confirmed in Rome.
Two Chinese tourists, who arrived in Milan on 23 January via Milan Malpensa Airport and travelled to Rome on a tourist bus, tested positive for and were hospitalised in Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for Infectious Diseases.On 6 February, one of the Italians repatriated from Wuhan, China tested positive, bringing the total number of cases in Italy to three.
On 22 February, the repatriated Italian recovered and was discharged from the hospital.
On 22 and 26 February, the two Chinese tourists tested negative at Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for Infectious Diseases in Rome.On 21 February, a cluster of cases was detected starting with 16 confirmed cases in Lombardy, with additional 60 cases on 22 February, and Italy's first deaths reported on the same day.
As of late February, Italy was hit harder than anywhere else in the EU by the COVID-19 outbreak.As of 17 March 2020, there have been 2,503 deaths and 31,506 confirmed cases.
8 March: In the early hours of Sunday, Italian prime minister Giuseppe Conte signed a decree enacting forced quarantine for the region of Lombardy – home to more than 10 million people and the financial capital, Milan – and multiple other provinces, totalling around 16 million residents.
The lockdown decree included the power to impose fines on anyone caught entering or leaving Lombardy, the worst-affected region, until 3 April.On 9 March in the evening, the lockdown orders were extended to the whole of Italy, effectively quarantining more than 60 million people.
On 10 March, The first case in the crown dependency was confirmed.
The first two cases were reported in the country on 13 March.
March 19 there are 20 cases with coronavirus in Kosovo.
The first case was reported in the country on 2 March.
The first case was reported in the country on 3 March.
The first case was reported in the country on 28 February.
March 17 there are 21 cases in lithuania mostly in Vilnius, Kaunas and Klaipėda
The first infected Lithuanian recovered on 14 March.
The first case was reported in the country on 29 February.
On 7 March, Malta reported its first 3 cases of coronavirus: an Italian family consisting of a 12-year-old girl and her parents, who arrived in Malta on 3 March from Rome after a holiday in Trentino.
The fourth case of covid-19 was confirmed on 9 March being a foreign man who had recently travelled to northern Italy.
The fifth case was confirmed on 10 March.
It is a 16-year-old girl who is the daughter of the 49-year-old man who was found to be infected with the coronavirus the previous day.
On 7 March, the first case was confirmed in the Republic of Moldova, a 48-year-old woman who recently returned from Italy.
Three days later, another two cases were confirmed.
The first case was reported in the country on 29 February.
The first case was reported in the country on 17 March 2020.
On 27 February, the Netherlands confirmed its first case, a man who had been in the Lombardy region of Italy.On 6 March, RIVM announced the first death.On 9 March, RIVM announced 56 more confirmed cases in addition to the total of the 77 infected patients declared in the previous day, bringing the total to 321 infected and 3 dead.On 15 March, the Dutch government announced in a press conference that all schools, daycares, colleges, universities, and universities of applied sciences would close until 6 April.
Though children of parents in vital industries could still go to school or the daycare if they couldn't be taken care of otherwise.As of 16 March, the total amount of confirmed cases of COVID-19 had risen to 1,413.
The total amount of confirmed deaths had risen to 24.
This was an increase of 278 infections and 4 deaths in comparison of 15 March.On the same date, the Minister President, Mark Rutte, of the Netherlands had announced that the country would not go in complete lockdown.
Instead the situation would be controlled as much as possible by allowing the virus to spread slowly but widely, relying on herd immunity until a vaccine is made available.
This strategy would result in (and rely on) a large proportion of the country's citizens becoming infected in the following months.
On 26 February, North Macedonia confirmed its first case, a woman that had returned from Italy.
On 26 February, Norway confirmed its first case, in a person who returned from China the previous week.On 7 March, there were 147 confirmed cases in Norway.
Most of the cases can either be linked to outbreaks abroad or close encounters with these.
All together 89 have been infected on travel in Italy.On 12 March 2020, all kindergartens, schools, colleges and universities were closed until at least 26 March 2020.
The first coronavirus infection in Poland, a man hospitalized in Zielona Góra, was confirmed on 4 March.
On 6 March another 4 infections were confirmed in Szczecin, Wrocław and Ostróda.
As of 22 March, there were 634 confirmed cases, 1 recovered and 7 deaths in Poland.
As part of the prevention, all schools in Poland will be closed from 12 to 25 March 2020.
On 2 March, two cases were confirmed in Portugal, both in the city of Porto.
One was a doctor that had returned from holiday in northern Italy and the other a worker from Spain.As of March 22, there are 1600 confirmed cases, 5 recoveries and 14 death.
On 26 February, Romania confirmed its first case.As of 15 March, there were 139 confirmed cases and 9 recoveries in Romania.
Russia implemented preventive measures to curb the spread of COVID-19 in the country by imposing quarantines, carrying raids on potential virus carriers and using facial recognition to impose quarantine measures.On 31 January, two cases were confirmed, one in Tyumen Oblast, another in Zabaykalsky Krai.
Both were Chinese nationals, who have since recovered.On 2 March, the first case in the Moscow region was confirmed.On 7 March, four new cases were confirmed, three was in Lipetsk and one in Saint Petersburg.
All people visited Italy in the previous two weeks.On 8 March, three news cases were confirmed, in Moscow, Belgorod and Kaliningrad Oblasts.
All people returned from Italy.On 10 March, Moscow Mayor Sergei Sobyanin signed a decree for banning mass events in Moscow with more than 5000 participants from 10 March to 10 April.
The first case was reported in the country on 27 February.
With 151 confirmed cases (as of 18 March 2020) out of a population of 33,344 (as of 2018), the country has the highest percentage of confirmed cases per capita in the world at 0.45%.
On 6 March one case was confirmed in Serbia by Minister of Health Zlatibor Lončar, of a man who had traveled to Budapest.
On 6 March Slovakia confirmed its first case, a 52-year-old man coming from a small town nearby Bratislava.
He had not travelled anywhere in recent weeks but his son had visited Venice.
His son didn't show any symptoms.
On 7 March, the virus was also confirmed in his wife and son.
On 13 March, Slovakia confirmed to have 30 cases of the coronavirus.
On 4 March Slovenia confirmed its first case.
A patient of about 60 years of age had returned from Morocco few days earlier (via Italy) and was admitted to a hospital in Ljubljana.On 6 March total 8 cases reported, three of them medical professionals, who contracted the virus on holiday in Italy.
By 9 March 16 people were confirmed to be infected.
On 31 January Spain confirmed its first case, in the Canary Island of La Gomera.
A tourist from Germany tested positive and was admitted to University Hospital of the Nuestra Señora de Candelaria.On 24 February, following the outbreak in Italy, a medical doctor from Lombardy, Italy who was vacationing in Tenerife, tested positive at the University Hospital of the Nuestra Señora de Candelaria in Spain.
Afterwards, multiple cases were detected in Tenerife involving people who had come in contact with the doctor.
Other cases involving individuals who visited Italy were also discovered on Spanish mainland.As of 17 March 2020, there have been 11,826 confirmed cases with 1,028 recoveries and 533 deaths in Spain.On 14 March, the Spanish government imposed a nationwide quarantine, banned all trips that are not necessary and announces that companies may be intervened to guarantee supplies.
On 31 January, Sweden confirmed the first case.
A woman in her 20s, who visited Wuhan, tested positive and was admitted at Ryhov County Hospital in Jönköping.On 26 February, following the outbreak in Italy and in Iran, infection clusters originating from these two countries appeared in Sweden.
A number of individuals in Västra Götaland, Jönköping, Stockholm, Uppsala tested positive and were admitted to the infectious disease units in the respective counties.As of 11 March, first fatality.
An elderly man in Stockholm over 60 who had other illnesses prior to infection.
As of 12 March, National testing strategy shifted to only elderly, severely ill, and healthcare personnel.
The official recommendation is as of 13 March to stay at home for symptoms that are not serious and not visit healthcare.
This makes statistics becoming less usefulAs of 14 March, 924 people reported infected.
The Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Sweden made the recommendation to refrain from unnecessary travel to all countries.
On 25 February, following the outbreak in Italy, Switzerland confirmed its first case, a 70-year-old man in the Italian-speaking canton of Ticino, who had previously visited Milan.
Afterwards, multiple cases related to the Italy clusters were discovered in multiple cantons including Basel-City, Zürich and Graubünden.
Multiple isolated cases not related to the Italian clusters were also confirmed.On 28 February, the Federal Council announced an immediate ban on all events with more than 1,000 participants.As of 10 March, there were 500 confirmed cases in Switzerland.
On 16 March 2020, the Federal Council announced further measures, and a revised ordinance.
Measures include the closure of bars, shops and other gathering places until 19 April, but leaves open certain essentials, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, (a reduced) public transport and the postal service.
On 11 March, Health Minister Fahrettin Koca announced that a Turkish man who had contracted the virus while travelling in Europe was the country's first coronavirus case.On 12 March, the government announced that schools and universities in Turkey would be closed starting from 16 March.
On 27 January SkyUp, a Ukrainian low-cost charter airline, announced that it had suspended flights to Sanya, Hainan, until March.On 4 February, Ukraine International Airlines suspended its charter service to Sanya Phoenix International Airport in Hainan.
Initially, the suspension was to last until 24 February, although the airline had not yet indicated that it will resume flights.On 24 February, Boryspil International Airport and Kyiv International Airport were supposed to implement thermal screening procedures for travellers from Italy, but the staff were either underequipped with thermal cameras or ignored the protocol.On 3 March, Ukraine announced its first confirmed coronavirus case.
A man had travelled from Italy to Romania by plane and then arrived in Ukraine by car.
On 31 January, England confirmed the first two cases, both members of a family of Chinese nationals staying in a hotel in York who were taken to specialist facilities in Newcastle upon Tyne.
Afterwards, several confirmed cases were detected in a number of regions including Brighton, Northern Ireland, Wales and then Scotland.The British government implemented preventive measures to curb the spread of infections which included contact tracing, isolation and testing, some of which were related to the Italy clusters.
The NHS set up drive-through screening centres at several hospitals.Prime Minister Boris Johnson has largely kept Britain open, opting for a solution of "herd immunity".
This involves enough people getting infected, upon which they develop immunity to the disease.
The UK's chief scientific adviser has said that 60% of the UK's population will need to become infected for herd immunity to be achieved.As of 22 March, there were 5,683 confirmed cases  and 281 deaths in the United Kingdom.
The first case was confirmed on 6 March.
Total confirmed cases since Day 1 of Outbreak
Syncing the start date, comparing the Daily growth
Syncing the start date till first 500 cases:
Syncing the start date till first 100 cases:
Although by 7 March some European politicians such as France's Marine Le Pen had called for Europe's internal borders to be temporarily closed, the European Union by 13 March continued to reject the idea of suspending the Schengen free travel area and introducing border controls with Italy.
The deputy leader of the Swiss Ticino League, Lorenzo Quadri, by 29 February had criticised the decision: "It is alarming that the dogma of wide-open borders is considered a priority."
United States President Donald Trump said by 12 March the European Union had "failed to take the same precautions and restrict travel from China and other hot spots" as the US had implemented.By 9 March Czech Prime Minister Andrej Babiš stated that "European countries cannot ban the entry of Italian citizens within the Schengen area.
The only possible way is to have the Italian prime minister call on his fellow citizens to refrain from traveling to other countries of the European Union."After Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland and Denmark announced complete closure of their national borders, the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said by 12 March that "Certain controls may be justified, but general travel bans are not seen as being the most effective by the World Health Organization.
Moreover, they have a strong social and economic impact, they disrupt people’s lives and business across the borders."
European Union leaders condemned the US decision to restrict travel from Europe to the United States.
European Council President Charles Michel and Ursula von der Leyen said in a joint statement: "The European Union disapproves of the fact that the US decision to impose a travel ban was taken unilaterally and without consultation."
Ursula von der Leyen admitted by 17 March that "all of us who are not experts initially underestimated the coronavirus."The Italian government has criticised EU's lack of solidarity with Italy.
Politico reported on 7 March that "EU countries have so far refused Italy's plea for help fighting coronavirus, as national capitals worry that they may need to stockpile face masks and other medical gear to help their own citizens, officials and diplomats said."
Maurizio Massari, Italy's ambassador to the EU, said that "Only China responded bilaterally.
Certainly, this is not a good sign of European solidarity."
Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić said that "European solidarity does not exist.
That was a fairy tale."
Platform for European Preparedness Against Re-emerging Epidemics (EU PREPARE project)
2019–20 coronavirus pandemic by country and territory
Worldwide Coronavirus Map, confirmed Cases – Map the route paths of coronavirus confirmed cases.
ncov – CSSE - Map of the expansion of the virus in Europe and in the world
2020 coronavirus pandemic in the United Kingdom
The 2019–20 coronavirus outbreak was confirmed to have spread to the United Kingdom on 31 January 2020 from China when the first two cases with the respiratory disease COVID-19, caused by the new coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, were confirmed in Newcastle upon Tyne in a family of Chinese nationals staying in a hotel in York.On 12 January the World Health Organization (WHO) confirmed that a new coronavirus was the cause of a respiratory illness in a cluster of people in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, who had initially come to the attention of the WHO on 31 December 2019.
The UK subsequently developed a prototype specific laboratory test for the new disease.
In response to the outbreak, Heathrow Airport received additional clinical support and tightened surveillance of the three direct flights that it received from Wuhan every week.
The four UK Chief Medical Officers (CMOs) raised the UK risk level from low to moderate on 30 January, upon the WHO's announcement of the disease as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).As soon as cases appeared in the UK on 31 January a public health information campaign was launched to advise people how to lessen the risk of spreading the virus.
Further cases in early February prompted the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, Matt Hancock, to introduce the Health Protection (Coronavirus) Regulations 2020 statutory instrument.
Guidance on infection prevention and control, how to detect and diagnose COVID-19, and daily updates, including advice to travellers, have been published by the UK's Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) and Public Health England (PHE).
In addition, the NHS set up COVID-19 drive-through screening centres at some hospitals.
Chief Medical Adviser to the UK Government, Chris Whitty explained a strategy to tackle the outbreak, based upon four aims: contain, delay, research and mitigate.The earliest documented transmission within the UK occurred on 28 February 2020; all of the cases detected previously had been infected abroad.
By 1 March, cases had been detected in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland.
Subsequently, Prime Minister Boris Johnson unveiled the Coronavirus Action Plan, and the government declared the outbreak a "level 4 incident".
On 11 March, the WHO declared the outbreak a pandemic.
Other responses included some schools in England choosing to close.
Some airlines announced a number of flight cancellations, and some online retailers reported consumers placing unusually large orders.
On 12 March, the UK risk level was raised from moderate to high.
Four days later, following the experience in Italy, whose health system shares similar values and organisation as the NHS, and based on evidence including forecasting by epidemiologists at Imperial College London, the government advised on further measures on social distancing and advised people in the UK against "non-essential" travel and contact with others, as well as suggesting people should avoid pubs, clubs and theatres, and work from home if possible.
Pregnant women, people over the age of 70 and those with certain health conditions were urged to consider the advice "particularly important", and would be asked to self-isolate.
On 18 March, it was announced that the UK will close all schools.
On 20 March, it was announced that all restaurants, pubs, clubs and shops (excluding food shops) were to be closed.
Delivery and take-out chains were allowed to remain open.
As of 22 March, after testing 72,818 people, there have been 5,683 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the United Kingdom.
281 people in the UK with confirmed infection have died, and one further death has been confirmed in the British Overseas Territory of the Cayman Islands.
Additionally, one British citizen died in the outbreak on the Diamond Princess cruise ship.
On 12 January, the World Health Organization (WHO) confirmed that a new coronavirus was the cause of a respiratory illness in a cluster of people in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China, who had initially come to the attention of the WHO on 31 December 2019.
This cluster was initially linked to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan City.
However, some of those first cases with laboratory confirmed results had no link to the market, and the source of the epidemic is unknown.Unlike SARS of 2003, the case fatality ratio for COVID-19, a disease also classified as a high consequence infectious disease (HCID), has been much lower, but the transmission has been significantly greater, with a significant total death toll.
COVID-19 typically appears with about seven days of flu-like symptoms followed by some people progressing to symptoms of a viral pneumonia requiring admission to hospital.
On 22 January, following a confirmed case of COVID-19 in the United States the previous day, in a man returning to Washington from Wuhan, China, where there were 440 confirmed cases at the time, the DHSC and PHE raised the risk level from "very low" to "low".
As a result, Heathrow Airport received additional clinical support and tightened surveillance of the three direct flights that it receives from Wuhan every week; each were to be met by a Port Health team.
In addition, all airports in the UK were to make written guidance (in English, Mandarin, and Cantonese) available for unwell travellers.
Simultaneously, efforts to trace 2,000 people who had flown into the UK from Wuhan over the previous 14 days were made.On 31 January, two members of a family of Chinese nationals staying in a hotel in York, one of whom studied at the University of York, became the first confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the UK.
Upon confirmation, they were transferred from Hull University Teaching Hospital to a specialist isolation facility, a designated High Consequence Infectious Diseases Unit in Newcastle upon Tyne.On the same day, an evacuation flight from Wuhan landed at RAF Brize Norton and the passengers, none of whom were showing symptoms, were taken to quarantine, in a staff residential block at Arrowe Park Hospital on the Wirral.
There had previously been contention over whether the government should assist the repatriation of UK passport holders from the most affected areas in China, or restrict travel from affected regions altogether.
Some British nationals in Wuhan had been informed that they could be evacuated but any spouses or children with mainland Chinese passports could not.
This was later overturned, but the delay meant that some people missed the flight.
On 6 February, a third confirmed case, a man who had recently travelled to Singapore prior to visiting a ski resort in the Haute-Savoie, France, was reported in Brighton.
He had been the source of infection to six of his relatives during a stay in France, before returning to the UK on 28 January.
Following confirmation of his result, the UK's CMOs expanded the number of countries where a history of previous travel associated with flu-like symptoms – such as fever, cough and difficulty breathing – in the previous 14 days would require self-isolation and calling NHS 111.
These countries included China, Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, Malaysia, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand.On 10 February, the total number of cases in the UK reached eight as four further cases were confirmed in people linked to the affected man from Brighton.
Globally, the virus had spread to 28 countries.
On the morning of 10 February, the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, Matt Hancock, announced the Health Protection (Coronavirus) Regulations 2020, to give public health professionals "strengthened powers" to keep affected people and those believed to be a possible risk of having the virus, in isolation.
That day, the Arrowe Park Hospital, Merseyside, and the Kents Hill Park hotel and conference centre, Milton Keynes became designated isolation units.
The following day, two of the eight confirmed cases in the UK were reported by BBC News to be general practitioners.
A ninth case was confirmed in London on 11 February.On 23 February, the DHSC confirmed a total of 13 cases in the UK as four new cases in passengers on the cruise ship Diamond Princess were detected.
Two were transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield, one to the Royal Liverpool University Hospital and one to the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle upon Tyne.On 27 February, the total number of confirmed cases in the UK were reported as 16, including the first case in Northern Ireland – a woman who had travelled from the outbreak area in northern Italy, having also stopped in Dublin.On 28 February, the first case in Wales was confirmed in a person who had returned from Northern Italy, and then transferred to a specialist NHS infection centre at the Royal Free Hospital in London.
The same day, two further cases were confirmed in England, one of whom was a man who was taken to Guy's and St Thomas' and who became the 20th case of COVID-19 in the UK and the first case who did not contract the disease from abroad.
He was a resident in Surrey and registered at the Haslemere Health Centre, which had previously been closed for "deep cleaning".On 29 February, three further cases of the virus were confirmed bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 23, after testing 10,483 people.
The three cases are from Gloucestershire, Hertfordshire and Berkshire.
Two of the three affected people had recently returned from Italy while the third had come back from Asia.
On the same day, Scottish CMO, Catherine Calderwood announced that surveillance would begin at some hospitals and 41 GP surgeries in Scotland.442,675 calls were made to the non-emergency line 111 in the last week of February.
On 1 March a further 13 cases were reported, adding Greater Manchester and Scotland to the list of areas affected and bringing the total to 36, three of which are believed to be contacts of the case in Surrey who had no history of travel abroad.On 2 March, four further people in England tested positive.
All four had recently travelled from Italy; they are from Hertfordshire, Devon and Kent.
The total number of UK cases was reported as having reached 40, though this was revised to 39 after additional testing.
The following day, when the total number of confirmed cases in the UK stood at 51, the UK Government unveiled their Coronavirus Action Plan, which outlines what the UK has done already and what it plans to do next.On 4 March, the total number of confirmed cases increased to 85.
Local press announced that an affected person is being treated at the Royal Stoke University Hospital.
On the same day, a case was confirmed in Gibraltar in a person who had travelled from Northern Italy.
On 5 March, three further cases were announced by the CMO for Scotland Catherine Calderwood, located in the areas of Forth Valley, Grampian and Greater Glasgow and Clyde.
That day, the total number of confirmed cases in the UK were reported by officials as 115, and a woman in her 70s with an existing medical condition, was reported to be the first fatality within the UK.
A further 48 were confirmed on 6 March, with the total being over 200 the next day, and adding a further 64 new cases on 8 March, the biggest increase in cases until that day.On 9 March, three cases were discovered in Dorset.
On 10 March, Evangelos Marinakis, owner of football clubs Nottingham Forest and Olympiacos, announced on his Instagram feed that he had been infected with the virus.
It was announced the same day that mental health minister Nadine Dorries MP had tested positive for the virus and was self isolating.
Nine more cases were also discovered in Wales bringing the total to 15.On 11 March, 83 more cases were discovered in the UK bringing the total to 456.
It was announced later that day that four new cases in Wales had been discovered, bringing the total to 19.
On the same day, the WHO declared the outbreak a pandemic, and it was discussed in the UK government's annual budget.On 12 March, the first confirmed case was found in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, where previously a man was isolated, raising the number of cases in South Yorkshire to 12.
Later that day 6 new cases were discovered in Wales, bringing the total to 25.
Meanwhile, the total of cases in the UK was reported to be 590.
On the same day, the UK CMOs raised the risk to the UK from moderate to high.
The government advised that anyone with a new continuous cough or a fever should self-isolate for seven days.
Schools were asked to cancel trips abroad, and people over 70 and those with pre-existing medical conditions were advised to avoid cruises.
On 13 March, the number of confirmed cases rose by 208 to 798 confirmed cases, with the first death from Coronavirus being reported in Scotland.
Many sporting fixtures including the London Marathon, the Six Nations Wales vs Scotland fixture, and all Premier League and EFL football games were postponed and the 2020 United Kingdom local elections were postponed for a year.
Similarly, the Country to Country music festival due to take place between 13–15 March at London's O2 Arena was also postponed.
The UK Government restricted the export of three drugs being administered to Covid-19 patients in clinical trials in China: Kaletra, Chloroquine Phosphate, and Hydroxychloroquine  On 14 March, the number of confirmed cases rose to 1,140 and the total number of people who had died in the UK had increased to 21.On 15 March, the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, Matt Hancock announced that everyone in Britain over the age of 70 would be told to self-isolate "within the coming weeks".
That day, the number of cases rose to 1,372 and the number of deaths increased to 35.On 16 March, the UK death toll rose to 55, with the number of cases of the illness passing 1,500.
The deaths included the first to be reported in Wales.
Also on 16 March, Prime Minister Boris Johnson advised everyone in the UK against "non-essential" travel and contact with others, as well as suggesting people should avoid pubs, clubs and theatres, and work from home if possible.
Pregnant women, people over the age of 70 and those with certain health conditions were urged to consider the advice "particularly important", and would be asked to self-isolate within days.
On the same day, the second Member of Parliament was diagnosed with the virus.
The new Labour MP for Jarrow, County Durham Kate Osborne tested positive after a period of self-isolation.
On 17 March, NHS England announced that all non-urgent operations in England would be postponed from 15 April to free up 30,000 beds.
Also on 17 March, Chancellor Rishi Sunak announced that £330bn would be made available in loan guarantees for businesses affected by the pandemic.
On that day the UK death toll rose to 71, while the number of confirmed cases increased to 1,950.On 18 March, Labour MP for Brighton Kemptown Lloyd Russell-Moyle announced that he had tested positive for with the virus, becoming the third MP to be diagnosed with the disease.On 19 March, the first death was confirmed in Northern Ireland.
The Ministry of Defence also announced the formation of the COVID Support Force, enabling the military to support public services and civilian authorities in tackling the outbreak.
Two military operations were also announced; Operation Rescript, which focuses on the outbreak in the United Kingdom, and Operation Broadshare, which focuses on British military activities overseas.Confirmed cases in Sheffield rose to 36 by 20 March, the highest for a UK city outside of London at that point.On 20 March, the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency announced that all pending practical and driving theory tests were to be postponed, for at least 3 months in the case of practical tests, and up to and including April 20 for theory tests.
All candidates were to receive notification of when their tests were rescheduled.On 22 March the UK death toll reached 281, including what was reported to be the virus's youngest victim so far, an eighteen-year-old with underlying health problems.
Shortly after confirming that the cause of the cluster of pneumonia in Wuhan was a new coronavirus, Chinese authorities had shared its genetic sequence for international developments of diagnostic kits.
The UK subsequently developed a prototype specific laboratory test for the new disease, performed on a sample from the nose, throat, and respiratory tract and tested at PHE's Colindale laboratories in London.
By 3 February, 326 tests had been performed in the UK.
Over the following few weeks, PHE made the test available to 12 other laboratories in the UK, making it possible to test 1000 people a day.Following 300 staff being asked to work from home on 26 February 2020 in London, while a suspected person was awaiting a test result for the virus, PHE announced it was to increase surveillance by widening testing around the UK to include people with flu-like symptoms at 100 GP surgeries and eight hospitals: the Royal Brompton and Harefield, Guy's and St Thomas' and Addenbrookes Hospital, as well as hospitals at Brighton and Sussex, Nottingham, South Manchester, Sheffield, Leicester.
Surveillance was shortly extended to some hospitals and GP surgeries in Scotland.Drive-through screening centres were set up by Central London Community Healthcare NHS Trust at Parsons Green Health Centre on 24 February 2020, and by NHS Lothian at the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh.
A further drive-through testing station was set up by the Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust at a site just off the A57 Sheffield Parkway dual-carriageway on 10 March; in this case, patients ringing NHS 111 with coronavirus-like symptoms in the Sheffield area will be told to drive, if possible, to the testing centre at an allotted time.On 11 March NHS England announced that testing in NHS laboratories would increase from testing 1,500 to 10,000 per day.
The test consists of taking a sample from the nose, throat, deeper lung samples, blood or stool, and transporting the packed samples to the listed PHE regional laboratory designated for the referring laboratory region.
As of 12/13 March 2020, 29,764 tests had been conducted in the UK, corresponding to 450.8 tests per million people.
Reports from the Medical Research Council's Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis at Imperial College, London have been providing mathematically calculated estimates of cases and cases fatality rates.
In February, the team at Imperial, led by epidemiologist Neil Ferguson, reported about two-thirds of cases in travellers from China were not detected and that some of these may have begun "chains of transmission within the countries they entered."
This translates to only one in three cases coming into the UK being detected.
They forecast that the new coronavirus could infect up to 60% of the UK's population, in the worst-case scenario.In a paper released but not yet published on 16 March, the Imperial team provided detailed forecasts of the potential impacts of the epidemic in the UK and USA.
Their paper details the potential outcomes of an array of 'non-pharmaceutical interventions' such as contact tracing and case isolation, home self quarantine, closure of bars, social venues or schools, and social distancing.
Two potential overall strategies outlined were: mitigation, in which the aim is to reduce the health impact of the epidemic but not to stop transmission completely; and suppression, where the aim is to reduce transmission rates to a point where case numbers fall.
Until this point government actions had been based on a strategy of mitigation, but the modelling predicted that while this would reduce deaths by approximately 2/3, it would still lead to approximately 250,000 deaths from the disease and the health systems becoming overwhelmed.
On the same day as the report was published, the Prime Minister announced in a press conference significant changes to the government advice, extending self isolation to whole households, advising social distancing particularly for vulnerable groups, and indicating that further measures were likely to be required in the future.
Guidance has altered in line with the number of cases detected and changes in where affected people have contracted the virus, as well as with what has been happening in other countries.
In February, Chief Medical Adviser to the UK Government, Chris Whitty explained "we basically have a strategy which depends upon four tactical aims: the first one is to contain; the second of these is to delay; the third of these is to do the science and the research; and the fourth is to mitigate so we can brace the NHS."
These aims equate to four phases; specific actions involved in each of these phases are:
Contain: detect early cases, follow up close contacts, and prevent the disease taking hold in this country for as long as is reasonably possible
Delay: slow the spread within the UK, and (if it does take hold) lower the peak impact and push it away from the winter season
Research: better understand the virus and the actions that will lessen its effect on the UK population; innovate responses including diagnostics, drugs and vaccines; use the evidence to inform the development of the most effective models of care
Mitigate: provide the best care possible for people who become ill, support hospitals to maintain essential services and ensure ongoing support for people ill in the community, to minimise the overall impact of the disease on society, public services and on the economy.The four UK CMOs raised the UK risk level from low to moderate on 30 January 2020, upon the World Health Organization's announcement of the disease as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
As soon as cases appeared in the UK on 31 January 2020, a public health information campaign, similar to the previous "Catch it, Bin it, Kill it" campaign, was launched in the UK, to advise people how to lessen the risk of spreading the virus.
Travellers from Hubei province in China, including the capital Wuhan were advised to self-isolate, "stay at home, not go to work, school or public places, not use public transport or taxis, ask friends, family members or delivery services to do errands", and call NHS 111 if they had arrived in the UK in previous 14 days, regardless of whether they were unwell or not.
Further cases in early February prompted the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, Matt Hancock, to announce the Health Protection (Coronavirus) Regulations 2020.
Daily updates have been published by the DHSC.
NHS Digital in the meanwhile, have been collecting data.
On 25 February 2020, the UK's CMOs advice for all travellers (unwell or not) who had returned to the UK from Hubei province in the previous 14 days, Iran, specific areas designated by the Italian government as quarantine areas in northern Italy and special care zones in South Korea since 19 February, to self-isolate and call NHS 111.
This advice was also advocated for any person who has flu-like symptoms with a history of travelling from Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and areas in Italy north of Pisa, Florence and Rimini, returning to the UK since 19 February.
Later, self-isolation was recommended for anyone returning from any part of Italy from 9 March.Prime Minister Boris Johnson has largely kept Britain open, opting for a solution of herd immunity.
This involves enough people getting infected, upon which they develop immunity to the disease.
The UK's chief scientific adviser has said that 60% of the UK's population will need to become infected for herd immunity to be achieved.On 2 March, Boris Johnson said in an interview with BBC News: "The most important thing now is that we prepare against a possible very significant expansion of coronavirus in the UK population".
This came after the 39th case in the UK was confirmed and over a month after the first confirmed case in the UK.
The same day, a BBC One programme Coronavirus: Everything You Need to Know addressed questions from the public on the outbreak.
The following day, the Coronavirus Action Plan was unveiled.
The next day, as the total number of cases in the UK stood at 51, the government declared the coronavirus outbreak as a "level 4 incident", permitting NHS England to take command of all NHS resources.
Planning has been made for behaviour changing publicity including good hygiene and respiratory hygiene ("catch it, bin it, kill it"), a simple measure which helps in delaying the peak of the infection and buys time for the testing of drugs and initial development of vaccines.
Primary care has been issued guidance.Public Health England has also been involved with efforts to support the British Overseas Territories against the outbreak.
The government published the Health Protection (Coronavirus) Regulations 2020 on 10 February 2020, a statutory instrument covering the legal framework behind the government's initial containment and isolation strategies and its organisation of the national reaction to the virus.
Other published regulations include changes to Statutory Sick Pay (into force on 13 March), and changes to Employment and Support Allowance and Universal Credit (also 13 March).On 19 March, the government introduced the Coronavirus Bill 2019–21, which would grant the government discretionary emergency powers in the areas of the NHS, social care, schools, police, the Border Force, local councils, funerals and courts.
The bill is expected to pass all stages of parliamentary consideration on 23 March.
In March, hospitals begin to prepare for the cancellation of all non-urgent elective procedures.
In March 2020, the Ministry of Defence announced the formation of the COVID Support Force, a 20,000 strong military support force to support public services and civil authorities in tackling the virus.
Two military operations; Operation Rescript, based in the UK, and Operation Broadshare, focused on overseas defence activities, were launched.
150 military personnel began receiving training to drive oxygen tankers for the NHS.
The Telegraph reported Chief of the Defence Staff Nick Carter had ordered the military to prepare for a "six month" operation.
The armed forces had previously been used to assist the government in bringing British citizens home from affected areas, such as China and Japan.
On March 22, the Royal Air Force reportedly assisted repatriation flights of British and EU citizens from Cuba.
The Guardian reported that training exercises, including those overseas in Canada and Kenya, had been cancelled to free up personnel for the COVID Support Force.
Several air shows, including the Royal International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford, were also cancelled.The Royal Air Force began using Birmingham Airport to practise transferring Coronavirus patients to local hospitals via helicopter.
From the latter half of January, Heathrow Airport received additional clinical support and tightened surveillance of the three direct flights that it receives from Wuhan every week; each were to be met by a Port Health team.
Later, airlines including British Airways and Ryanair announced a number of flight cancellations for March.Regional airline Flybe had been brought to the brink of collapse following prior financial trouble earlier in the year.
This, combined with decreased ticket sales as a result of the outbreak, caused the airline to stop ticket sales on 4 March 2020.
The company entered administration and ceased operations the following day.
On 19 March, the Stagecoach Supertram light rail network in Sheffield announced that they would be switching to a modified Sunday service from 23 March until further notice.
Local bus operators First South Yorkshire and Stagecoach Yorkshire, which operate across the same area, announced that they would also be switching to a reduced timetable from 23 March.On 20 March, Southeastern became the first train operating company to announce a reduced timetable, which would come into use from 23 March.Transport for London (TfL) services are being reduced in stages.
All Night Overground and Night Tube services, as well as all services on the Waterloo & City line, were suspended from 20 March, and 40 tube stations were closed on the same day.
The Mayor of London and TfL urged people to only use public transport if absolutely essential, so that it can be used by critical workers.
A further reduction in service from 23 March will affect London Overground, TfL Rail, Docklands Light Railway and London Trams services.
It was reported in The Guardian that British supermarkets and their suppliers had developed a plan to ensure a consistent supply of a range of basic goods if there was panic-buying by consumers.
Tesco, the country's largest supermarket chain, was said to have carried out simulation exercises to plan for events such as a pandemic flu outbreak which could be used to deal with the coronavirus outbreak.
There have been reports of hand sanitiser and anti-bacterial products selling out at some supermarkets.
Online retailers reported consumers placing unusually large orders while the managing director of the frozen food chain Iceland reported increased sales of "multibuy deals and larger packs".
Some supermarkets and other shops responded by limiting the amount customers brought of popular items, whilst others had a blanket limit across their entire range.
Sainsburys announced on 18 March that they would introduce a dedicated shopping hour for elderly and disabled customers, as well as giving them priority for online deliveries.
Other supermarkets, such as Iceland and Morrisons also introduced measures.
Sainsbury's further announced on 21 March that they would give healthcare workers allocated shopping hours on three mornings a week, along with elderly and vulnerable customers.Amazon stopped sellers from sending non essential products to their warehouses and Selfridges closed all its stores, however customers can still buy their products from their website.In response to the panic buying of food, Professor Stephen Powis, medical director at NHS England, said on 21 March that NHS staff were being deprived of food supplies because of the activities of some consumers, and urged people to shop responsibly.
Helen Dickinson, head of the British Retail Consortium said that there was enough food in the supply chain, but that the issue was getting it to retailers quick enough, suggesting the food industry was experiencing "a peak in demand" like at Christmas, but "without the four-month build-up period."
She added that that an extra £1bn had been spent on food in the preceding three weeks.
Environment Secretary George Eustice also urged shoppers to stop panic buying.
On the same day it was reported that Tesco, Asda, Aldi, and Lidl had begun a recruitment drive for up to 30,000 new staff.
Fast food and drink outlets, Pret a Manger and McDonald's (among others) announced that they would not permit customers to sit and eat in stores, however customers can still order products to takeaway and consume off the premises.
Initially, the pub chain J D Wetherspoon remained open, despite government advice for the public to avoid places of social activity, including pubs.
The chain announced that it would keep all pubs open "unless the government states otherwise" On 20 March, all Wetherspoon pubs were closed in line with instructions from the government
The governor of the Bank of England called on the British government to provide support to businesses affected by the  virus and was reported to be working with the Treasury to provide a stimulus package to prevent the British economy falling into recession.
Companies listed on the London stock markets have fallen in value with commentators citing worries about the virus.
To stimulate the economy, the Bank of England cut interest rates from 0.75 to 0.25 percent.
On 19 March, the interest rate was again cut this time to 0.10% – the lowest rate in the bank's 325 year existence.
Following cases in Italy, the Cransley School in Northwich, Cheshire, and Trinity Catholic College in Middlesbrough closed, as some of their pupils had returned with symptoms from Italy.
Fourteen schools in England had closed by 28 February.
Loughborough University reported a student confirmed to have the virus after recent travel to Italy, and indicated that several staff members and students began self-isolation.Cambridge University was heavily criticised for their incoherent response to the pandemic which forced international students and staff to scramble to make arrangements to return home with only two days' notice.
On 13 March, students and staff were advised that international travel was discouraged and university facilities would stay open at reduced capacity.
However, on 18 March, Vice Chancellor Stephen Toope announced a sudden U-turn and all university buildings would be indefinitely shut from all staff and students from the afternoon of Friday 20 March onwards, and all students are strongly encouraged to leave Cambridge.
The president of Cambridge UCU criticised that this sudden shutdown will exacerbate the pandemic as students from countries with weaker healthcare provisions are forced to return home.
Over a thousand Cambridge students signed an open letter requesting to have multiple assessment options in lieu of the cancelled examinations in Cambridge, including the option to retake part or all of the academic year in 2020–21.
Coventry University first suspended all graduation ceremonies due to be held in March and April,  and from 20 March, suspended all face-to-face teaching, in favour of on-line delivery.
Many other higher education institutions took similar steps at around the same time.On 18 March, the Welsh government announced that all schools in Wales would be closing by 20 March.
On the same day, the First Minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon announced that Scottish schools would be closing from the end of the week, and may not reopen before the summer.
Later that day, it was announced that schools in Northern Ireland would close to pupils immediately and to staff on 20 March.
Shortly thereafter, the Secretary of State for Education, Gavin Williamson announced that schools in England would close from 20 March for an unspecified length of time.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson said, however, that schools will still look after the children of key workers, and vulnerable children.
The UK government also announced that GCSE and A Level exams were to be cancelled, an unprecedented action in UK educational history, and that grades were to be given out based on predicted grades and teacher assessment.
There have been isolated reports of hate incidents against Italian and Chinese persons and a Singaporean student was assaulted in London in an attack that police linked to coronavirus fears.
On 17 March trials lasting longer than three days were postponed until May in England and Wales, while Scottish courts were not starting any new trial indefinitely.
In England and Wales those cases already running would continue in the hope of reaching a conclusion.
The government released specific guidance to prisons in the event of coronavirus symptoms or cases, specifically the rule that "any prisoner or detainee with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature should be placed in protective isolation for 7 days".On 14 March, a prison officer in HMP High Down in Surrey tested positive for the virus and was sent home to self-isolate.
Four officers who had contact with him were placed in isolation as a precaution.
On 18 March, the first coronavirus case was reported within the UK prison population.
The prisoner, who had been serving time in HMP Manchester (commonly referred to as Strangeways), was moved to a hospital.
While no other prisoners or staff tested positive for the virus, thirteen prisoners and four members of staff were put into isolation as a precaution.
Prison visits remained open, but the situation is being monitored.
On 19 March, it was revealed that around 75 officers at HMP Berwyn in Wales were off work due to sickness or self-isolation, and 22 prisoners showing symptoms of coronavirus were being isolated by the prison.
However, the prison had enough staff members to remain fully operational.
Another prison officer tested positive on 20 March at HMP Whitemoor near March, Cambridgeshire.Following the case in HMP Manchester, public services think tank Reform called for the release of 2,305 "low-risk" offenders on short sentences to reduce the risk of coronavirus on the prison population.
Their report argues that prison are "overcrowded [with] insanitary conditions and poor-quality healthcare".
Similar actions have been taken in Iran and the United States.
Former justice secretary David Gauke echoed similar sentiments, citing the "churn" of prisoners going in and out of prison as a risk.
On 5 March the England–Italy fixtures in the mens' and womens' Six Nations tournaments, set to be played in Rome on 14 and 15 March, were postponed by tournament organisers after the Italian government introduced restrictions on attendances to sporting events.
Scotland's Women's Six Nations home fixture against France on 7 March was also postponed after one Scotland player tested positive for the virus.
The Rugby Football Union suspended all forms of rugby in England from 17 March to 14 April, which was then extended to the end of the season with the exception of the Premiership on 20 March.
The Welsh Rugby Union also suspended all forms of rugby in Wales from 14 to 30 March, which also extended to the end of the season of 20 March.
To contain the spread of the virus the Premier League announced on 6 March an end to pre-match fair play handshakes between players and officials.
On 10 March, the Premier League match between Manchester City and Arsenal was postponed in light of confirmation that Nottingham Forest and Olympiacos owner Evangelos Marinakis had contracted the virus.
Marinakis had met with several Arsenal players when the London side hosted Olympiacos in a Europa League round of 32 match.
On 10 March the four-day Cheltenham Festival continued as planned with enhanced hygiene measures in place, as did the All England Open Badminton Championships in Birmingham the next day.On 12 March it was announced that Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta had tested positive to COVID-19, and the next day Chelsea midfielder Callum Hudson-Odoi became the first Premier League player to test positive for coronavirus.
Professional football was later suspended across the United Kingdom on 13 March, with the Premier League, English Football League, Women's Super League, and Welsh and Northern Irish football leagues delaying matches until the beginning of April and the Scottish Professional Football League suspending matches indefinitely.
Professional football in England was later postponed until the end of April.
The day also saw the cancellation of the Wales–Scotland Six Nations match scheduled for 14 March and the postponement of the London, Manchester and Brighton Marathons from their April dates until the autumn.The next five days saw a flurry of further sporting cancellations.
Five fixtures set to be played on Saturday 14 March in the National League were abandoned, with all matches across both the National League and the Northern Premier League suspended two days later and the Football Association recommending the postponement of grassroots level football "for the foreseeable future".
The Welsh Rugby Union discontinued all rugby matches across Wales from Saturday evening until the end of the month.
On Sunday 15 March the Netball Superleague was postponed.
Premiership Rugby was suspended for five weeks on Monday 16 March, with all rugby activities in England being delayed until 14 April.
Monday additionally saw the cancellation of the Grand National, the postponement of the Edinburgh Marathon from May to September, and the first peacetime cancellation of the Boat Race.
On Tuesday 17 March all motor racing events sanctioned by the national governing body Motorsport UK were suspended until May. All horse racing events were similarly suspended the following day, as were all boxing tournaments until further notice subject to a British Boxing Board of Control review in April.
On 13 March BBC Radio 1 announced that it would cancel its Big Weekend music festival, scheduled to take place in Dundee over the Spring Bank Holiday weekend at the end of May. Other music events to be cancelled included the C2C: Country to Country festival, the UK's largest country music event, and the 2020 Glastonbury Festival which was cancelled on 18 March.
Among the artists and bands to postpone or cancel UK gigs or tours were Avril Lavigne and The Who.
Others, including Chris Martin of Coldplay, Yungblud, Keith Urban and Christine And The Queens responded to the situation by live-streaming gigs through social media.On 15 March, London's Old Vic became the first West End theatre to cancel a performance when it ended its run of Samuel Beckett's Endgame two weeks early.
On 16 March, other theatres in London, as well as elsewhere around the UK, closed following Boris Johnson's advice that people should avoid such venues.
On 17 March, cinema chains Odeon, Cineworld, Vue and Picturehouse announced they would be closing all of their UK outlets.Television programmes to be affected included forthcoming series of Peaky Blinders and Line of Duty, which had their filming schedules delayed.
On 13 March, ITV announced that the 2020 series finale of Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway, scheduled to be broadcast from Walt Disney World in Florida would no longer go ahead after the resort announced its intention to close as a precautionary measure.
On 16 March, ITV announced that the filming schedule for its two soaps, Coronation Street and Emmerdale had not been affected by the pandemic, but said the programmes would "remind people of important public health issues" like hand-washing.
Two days later ITV said that the filming schedule for Coronation Street would change, and the number of weekly episodes be reduced, This was followed on 22 March by the announcement that filming would completely cease from the following day.
On 18 March ITV announced the semi-final of the ninth series of The Voice UK, scheduled for Saturday 28 March, would be postponed until later in the year.On 16 March, the BBC delayed the implementation of its planned changes to TV licences for those aged over 75 from June to August.
On 17 March the BBC announced major changes to the schedule across the network.
While programmes such as Politics Live, Victoria Derbyshire, The Andrew Neil Show, Newswatch, The Travel Show and HARDtalk were suspended, others such as Newsnight and The Andrew Marr Show would continue with a smaller number of production staff.
Question Time would be moved to an earlier timeslot and be broadcast without an audience from a fixed location.
Podcast programmes Americast, Beyond Today and The Next Episode were also suspended.
On 18 March it was announced that filming on the sets of Casualty, Doctors, EastEnders, Holby City, Pobol y Cwm and River City would be suspended.
The broadcaster additionally announced that the number of weekly episodes of EastEnders would be reduced to ensure that it remained on screen for as long as possible.
The BBC also said that it would show more educational programmes to cater for children not attending school, and that it was in talks with the Department for Education and schools to support GCSE and A Level curriculums with extra programmes on BBC Four and the BBC Red Button service.
The BBC would also broadcast more programmes focused on health, fitness, education, religion and food recipes, while both the BBC and ITV would produce a weekly prime-time programme giving the public information about the coronavirus pandemic.
On the same day the 2020 Eurovision Song Contest, scheduled to be held in Rotterdam in May, was also cancelled.
On 22 March, ITV announced that its daytime programmes Lorraine and Loose Women would cease live broadcasting from the following day.On radio the BBC World Service programmes The World This Week, World Update and Weekend were all suspended.
Radio news summaries on Radio 2, Radio 3, Radio 4 and Radio 5 Live were merged into a single output, with BBC 6 Music using the same script.
The BBC Asian Network and Newsbeat worked together to maintain production of stories.
Week in Westminster which broadcasts on Radio 4 was also suspended.
On 18 March, the BBC announced that its local radio stations in England would broadcast a virtual church service, led initially by the Archbishop of Canterbury, but with plans to expand religious services to cover other faiths.
On the same day Radio News Hub, a radio news bulletin provider based in Leeds announced that it would produce a daily ten-minute programme giving a round-up of information about the pandemic and that would be made available free of charge to radio stations.
The Queen has left London for Windsor Castle.
On 19 March she issued a message to the nation noting that the country and the world was entering a period of great concern and uncertainty.
Her grandsons Harry and William both sent messages out via social media.
Princess Beatrice cancelled her wedding reception at Buckingham Palace and took further advice on whether to carry on with a private wedding ceremony.
Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, the wife of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, tested positive for Covid-19 upon her return from WE Day events in the UK; on 12 March 2020 the Trudeau family entered two weeks of self-isolation.
The first patient in Mauritius was a 59-year-old man who returned from the United Kingdom on 7 March 2020.
When he arrived in Mauritius, the Mauritian had no symptoms.
Other cases of the novel coronavirus resulting from travel to the UK were subsequently reported in India, and Nigeria among other countries.
The figures in the table below represent laboratory confirmed cases only; however, as indicated by the UK Government's Chief Scientific Adviser Sir Patrick Vallance, it is likely that other cases in the UK are not reflected in these figures (on 12 March 2020 there were 596 confirmed cases, but the total number of cases was estimated at 5,000–10,000).Known locations of death are shown in brackets.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) on the NHS website
Coronavirus (COVID-19): UK government information
The Health Protection (Coronavirus) Regulations 2020.
Legislation.gov.uk
Public Health Agency – Advice on COVID-19 (coronavirus)
Worldometer UK Statistics – Worldometer graphs and statistics for the UK
2020 coronavirus pandemic in South Korea
The first confirmed case of the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in South Korea was announced on 20 January 2020.
On 19 February, the number of confirmed cases increased by 20 and on 20 February by 58 or 70, giving a total of 346 confirmed cases on 21 February 2020, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Korea (KCDC), with the sudden jump mostly attributed to "Patient 31" who participated in a gathering at a Shincheonji Church of Jesus the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony church in Daegu.Amidst the fears of further contamination, mass gatherings in the affected cities were cancelled and a few hundred soldiers in Daegu are in isolation.
As of 4 Feb, South Korea denies entry to foreigners traveling from Hubei Province to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.As of 18 March 2020, South Korea has about 8,400 cases and 84 deaths, with over 200,000 people having been tested, a case fatality rate of 1.0%, which is lower than the WHO's global case fatality rate of 3.4%.South Korea introduced what was considered the largest and best-organised program in the world to screen the population for the virus, and isolate any infected people as well as tracing and quarantining those who contacted them.
The rapid and extensive measures taken by South Korea has been judged successful in limiting the spread of the outbreak despite not using the drastic measure of quarantining entire cities.
During the first four weeks, South Korea controlled the potential spread of COVID-19 by using high-tech resources like tracking the use of credit cards and checking CCTV footage of confirmed patients.
However, since 18 February, the number of cases increased to more than 1,700 after discovery of the fact that patient No. 31 was a member of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus.
Some media reported that  was difficult for KCDC to screen the patient because Shincheonji teaches that illness is sin.
Many members were uncooperative with KCDC and could not be contacted.
Shincheonji denied this, and other sources report that the sect did cooperate with the authorities.
About half of confirmed cases were linked to the Shincheonji Church as of 27 February; this was verified by health officials.
As of 10 March, the KCDC was able to contact and test most of the Shincheonji Church members, with the total number of tests nationally standing at around 200,000.
On 20 January, the first confirmed case was identified as a 35-year-old Chinese woman.
The first South Korean national to be infected occurred three days later was a 55-year-old man who worked in Wuhan and returned for a checkup with flu symptoms.
The two infection reports were publicly released on 24 January.On 26 January, a third case as a 54-year-old South Korean man.
He had used a rental car and visited three restaurants, a hotel, a convenience store and met his family before admitting himself to hospital.
All these places were disinfected.
On 27 January, a fourth case was reported as a 55-year-old South Korean man who returned from Wuhan on 20 January.
He first experienced flu symptoms on 21 January and suffered further complications four days later, eventually turning himself in.
Both cases were tallied into formal records on 27 January.On 1 February, an update on the first four patients indicated that the first three patients were showing weaker symptoms and recovering well while the fourth patient was getting treatment from pneumonia.
Rumours circulated that the fourth patient had died which health authorities denied.Two more confirmed cases were reported on 30 January with the fifth patient being a 32-year-old South Korean man who returned from his work at Wuhan on 24 January.
The sixth patient was the first case in South Korea who had never visited Wuhan.
The 56-year-old man caught the virus when visiting a restaurant with the third patient.On 31 January, a seventh patient was reported as a 28-year-old South Korean man returning from Wuhan on 23 January.
He developed symptoms on 26 January, and was admitted to the hospital on 28 January.
On the same day, four more patients were admitted into the record as the eighth patient, 62-year-old South Korean woman, returned from Wuhan.
The ninth patient caught the virus from the fifth patient through direct contact while the tenth and the eleventh patient were the wife and child who were infected while visiting the sixth patient.On 1 February, a 49-year-old Chinese national working in Japan as a tour guide was confirmed as the twelfth patient.
He caught the virus while visiting a Japanese patient in Japan and entered South Korea through Gimpo International Airport on 19 January.
The KCDC confirmed an additional three cases on 2 February, bringing the total to fifteen.A woman, who had returned from Thailand after a five-day vacation, was tested positive and confirmed as the sixteenth case on 4 February.
Three more cases were confirmed on 5 February, bringing the total case count to 19.
The seventeenth and nineteenth patients had attended a conference in Singapore and been in contact with an infected individual there.
The very same day the KCDC announced that the second patient had been released from hospital after being tested negative in consecutive tests, becoming the country's first coronavirus patient to fully recover.
On 18 February, South Korea confirmed its 31st case in Daegu, a member of the Shincheonji religious organisation.
The patient continued to go to gatherings of Shincheonji days after showing symptoms, which are typically held with people in very close proximity and include physical contact of the members.
Many of the patient's close contacts would turn out to be infected, triggering a drastic escalation of the South Korean spread of confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection.On 19 February, the number of confirmed cases increased by 20.
On 20 February,  70 new cases were confirmed, giving a total of 104 confirmed cases, according to the KCDC.
According to Reuters, KCDC attributed the sudden jump of 70 cases linked to "Patient No. 31", who had participated in a gathering in Daegu at the Shincheonji Church of Jesus the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony.On 20 February, the streets of Daegu were empty in reaction to the Shincheonji outbreak.
A resident described the reaction, stating "It's like someone dropped a bomb in the middle of the city.
The first death was reported in a mental ward of Cheongdo Daenam Hospital in Cheongdo County.
According to the mayor of Daegu, the number of suspected cases as of 21 February was 544 among 4,400 examined followers of the church.
The hospital was suspected as the source of the present outbreak after it was visited by a woman who became the second fatal case of South Korea on that day.
Upon investigation, it was determined that the infection had spread to that hospital through a funeral ceremony attended by members of the church.All South Korean military bases were on lockdown after tests confirmed three soldiers to be positive for the virus.
Airlines cut connections and cultural schedules were being canceled due to fears of further spread.
United States Forces Korea  raised the alert level from low to moderate and  cut off non-essential travel to and from USFK Daegu.
USFK Daegu's school facilities were closed and non-essential personnel were ordered to stay at home while any visitors going there were not allowed to enter.
USFK announced that the widow of a retired soldier who was in Daegu was diagnosed to be positive for the virus on 24 February.
Camp Humphreys enacted virus detection protocols, including temperature checks and raised the alert level to high.
On 26 February, an American soldier based at Camp Carroll was diagnosed to be positive and was quarantined away from bases via off-base housing unit with contact tracing done that showed his movements to Camp Walker.As of 22 February, among 9,336 followers of the church, 1,261 reported symptoms.
At the time, 169 confirmed cases involved the same church and another 111 came from the Cheongdo Daenam Hospital.
23 February saw another 123 cases with 75 being from Shincheonji and 24 February saw 161 additional cases with 129 being from the same religious group.
Over 27,000 people have been tested for the virus with 19,127 negative results.On 24 February, 15 countries imposed travel restrictions to and from South Korea.
It was also reported that a senior health official overseeing the COVID-19 efforts in Daegu tested positive and was also a member of Shincheonji.
Within a few days, a petition to the nation's president urging for the disbandment of the church had over 750,000 signatures.
Their headquarters in Gwacheon was raided by law enforcement and government officials said all 245,000 members of the religious group would be found and tested.On 28 February, over 2,000 confirmed cases were reported.
On 2 March, there were over 4,200 confirmed cases.
With an additional 4,000 cases of COVID-19 within two weeks, and roughly 60% of the total infections nationwide having stemmed from the church, the Seoul city government asked prosecutors to press charges against the religious group's founder and senior members for murder, causing harm, and for violating the Infectious Disease and Control Act.
Interviews have occurred with all 230,000 members of the religious group and nearly 9,000 were said to be showing symptoms of the virus.
Due to the number of infections in the country, ninety-five countries have banned or limited entry for South Korean passport holders.
Testing is also conducted at drive-through testing sites where patients do not leave their vehicles, but are met by medical personnel in hazmat suits over several stations.
The process is completed in a few minutes and results come in several days.
On 8 March, KCDC in South Korea announced that 79.4% of confirmed COVID-19 cases were related to group infection.
KCDC also announced that outbreak associated with Shincheonji Church totaled 4,482 infections, accounting for 62.8% of the total confirmed cases.March 13 was the first time since the outbreak on January 20 in which the number of recoveries, 177, was larger than the number of those who newly tested positive, 110.
Korean news sites are using the stock trading term "golden cross" (골든크로스) to refer to this.The controversy about Shincheonji also continued, and generated international interest.
After the lawsuit started by the Mayor of Seoul, the police raided the church premises to check whether the list of members supplied by Shincheonji pursuant to a request by the authorities was, as the Mayor argued, not complete.
The authorities checked the list seized during the raid with the one Shincheonji had supplied, and concluded that discrepancies were minor.The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) expressed concern that religious freedom rights of Shincheonji members may be violated in South Korea by "exaggerating the church's role in the outbreak," and stated that, "USCIRF has received reports of individuals encountering discrimination at work and spousal abuse because of their affiliation with the church."
USCIRF reported that South Korean "Vice Minister of Health Kim Kang-lip has publicly stated that the Shincheonji church has cooperated with authorities."
The Belgian NGO Human Rights Without Frontiers released a "White Paper" claiming that, although it did make "mistakes" in its management of the crisis, Shincheonji had also been discriminated because of its status as an unpopular group in South Korea.On 17 March, around 79 church devotees were infected with the virus after attending the River of Grace Community Church.
The infections were claimed to have been caused by spraying salt-water into followers' mouths, under the belief that this would protect them from the virus.
As of 18 March, South Korea's KOSPI stock index has dropped nearly 30% compared to a month ago.
The drop precipitated on 23 February, when the country raised the coronavirus alert to 'highest level'.
As of 15 March, the KOSPI closed at 1,771.44 and the Kosdaq finished at 524 points, down 7%, prompting the Financial Supervisory Commission to impose a six-month ban on short-selling, the first such drastic action in nearly nine years.
This was despite a markedly lower daily increase in cases.
Automaker Hyundai Motor Company, having shut down its factories as the outbreak intensified, saw exports drop 21.4% in February from the same month last year.
As of 25 February, Daegu officials were aggressively warning residents to take precautions, while allowing private businesses such as restaurants to stay open.
All Daegu's public libraries, museums, churches, day-care centers and courts had been closed.Apart from the city of Daegu and the church community involved, most of South Korea is operating close to normality, although nine planned festivals have been closed and tax-free retailers are closing.
The South Korean military manpower agency made an announcement that conscription from Daegu will temporarily be suspended.
The Daegu Office of Education decided to postpone the start of every school in the region by one week.Numerous educational institutes have temporarily shut down, including dozens of kindergartens in Daegu and several elementary schools in Seoul.
As of 18 February, most universities in South Korea had announced plans to postpone the start of the spring semester.
This included 155 universities planning to delay the semester start by two weeks to 16 March, and 22 universities planning to delay the semester start by one week to 9 March.
Also, on 23 February 2020, all kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools were announced to delay the semester start from 2 March to 9 March.The economy of South Korea is forecast to grow 1.9%, which is down from 2.1%.
The government has provided 136.7 billion won for local governments as support.
The government has also organized the procurement of masks and other hygiene equipment.Entertainment agency SM Entertainment reportedly donated five hundred million won in efforts to fight the disease.In the K-POP industry, the rapid spread of the coronavirus within South Korea has led to the cancellations or postponing of concerts and other events for K-POP acts within and outside of South Korea, with example situations including the cancellation of the remaining Asia dates and the Europe leg for Seventeen’s Ode To You Tour on 9 February 2020 and the cancellation of all Seoul dates for BTS' Map of the Soul Tour.
As of 20 March, a total of 171 countries and territories have issued entry bans and/or suspended visas for travelers from South Korea.
The Blue House announced on February 28 the current status of coronavirus tests in Korea, comparing the testing situation in the United States and Japan.
The number of inspections was 26 or 120 times higher than in other countries as of 28 Feb. The cumulative number of inspections was about 53,000 by South Korea, while Japan was about 2,000, and in US about 440 cases were examined.
On 20 February, one of the public reports by the South Korean government was titled "Pan-Governmental Special Aid Committee is assembled to handle Coronavirus 19 in Daegu" which can be also parsed as "...assembled to handle Daegu Coronavirus 19."
After concerns were raised about potentially enabling discrimination, the government apologized on 22 February for using misleading expression and corrected the incorrect expression.
On 26 January, the Korean Medical Association (KMA) asked the government to temporarily bar entry to all travelers arriving from mainland China.
On 27 January, KMA President Choi Dae-zip said: "The third confirmed case indicates that we have reached the point where we have to get rid of passive stance and actively prepare for the worsening of the situation,  (and) the government should thoroughly monitor the trend of China's national outbreak of the virus and prepare administrative measures such as complete entry ban from China in case of the worst situation."
On 3 February, The KMA recommended halting all travel from China, rather than only from Hubei province.
After all, The KMA called for stronger government response in a total of six statements between 20 January, when the nation's first confirmed case occurred, and 18 February.
A short time after that, cases spiked in Daegu and throughout the country.
Although there are many confirmed cases of COVID-19, President Moon Jae-in's approval rating rose by 2 percentage points to 44%.
During the MERS crisis, the previous President Park Geun-hye's approval rating had fallen sharply to 29% due to inadequate management the MERS infection.In opinion poll conducted by Gallup Korea in the second week of March 2020, president Moon's approval rating has risen by 5% to 49%.
There are two controversial petitions on the official Presidential Blue House website: one is for supporting President Moon for his handling of the coronavirus outbreak and another is for disapproval of President Moon's management of the coronavirus outbreak.
The petitions of disapproval was completed by 1.46 million votes, and another petition of supporting President Moon reached more than 1.3 million votes, and it is planned to be completed by 27 March 2020.
In February 2020, an entrance to a South Korean restaurant in downtown Seoul reportedly had a sign in red Chinese characters stating: "No Chinese Allowed."
"No Chinese" signs have been cropping up throughout the country, and some businesses are simply banning all foreigners.
Some foreign residents have been excluded from the government mask distribution program as it is currently only allowed to 1.25 million foreigners who were subscribed to the public health insurance.
There is a shortage of face masks in S.Korea.
Concerning COVID-19, More than 760,000 South Korean citizens have signed a petition lobbying the government to ban Chinese tourists from entering the country.
The Daegu Lantern Festival mistakenly posted a notice in English that no foreigners are allowed to visit.
However, the wrong sentence was removed and it was revealed a translation error by the  PR agency regarding statement from a Daegu government official.
The official in the Daegu city stated that the original message was the notification to foreign tourists about the delayed schedule of festival over COVID-19 concerns.
On 24 February, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) upgraded the status of South Korea to level 3 (avoid non-essential travels due to widespread community transmission).On 28 February, Charles Schwab Corporation advised employees who had travelled to China and South Korea to self-quarantine for 14 days.
Multiple companies such as Amazon, Google, TD Bank Group, Bank of Nova Scotia, London Stock Exchange Group, and Cargill, Inc.
deferred all non-essential travels to areas affected by the outbreak.As of 8 March, US military has suspended all travels to and from South Korea for all military personnel and their family over the concern of the virus.As of 10 March, 109 countries or regions restrict entry of visitors from South Korea.
CNN  had an interview with South Korea health minister Park Neung-hoo.
Park expressed cautiously his desire  that the coronavirus outbreak is 'passed the peak' as per the result regarding the number of new daily infections has declined in recent days.
The S. Korean government has the ability operate about 15,000 diagnostic test per day and has conducted over 190,000 tests by 10 March nationwide.
Park also answered the inquiry from CNN about practicable tips for controlling COVID-19.
Park believes that dealing with outbreaks by focusing efforts on early testing and global cooperation would be crucial instead of the lockdown option, as the virus could still spread quickly without testing.
S. Korean authorities have arranged the two types of facilities, one for about 10% of coronavirus patients who required hospitalization and another for  the patients who were only suffering from mild symptoms.
Time magazine and BBC News concluded that the reason for the high number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus in South Korea is thanks to the relative "openness" and "transparency" in the Korean society.
As for the rapid spread of the virus, the reason was the religious group Shincheonji Church.
The Blue House announced on 28 February the current status of coronavirus tests in three countries: Korea, the United States, and Japan, and analyzed statistically the reasons why there were so many confirmed cases in South Korea: the number of inspections was 26 or 120 times higher than other countries.
The cumulative number of inspections was about 53,000 in South Korea, with only 2,000 in Japan and 440 cases examined in the United States.
After the tests, the rate of confirmed cases was highest in Japan (9.04%), followed by Korea (3.3%) and the United States (3.15%).
ZDF, a major public broadcaster in Germany, assessed that Korea's COVID-19 management, conducting massive inspections daily, is the fastest but hardest way to transparently disclose the confirmed COVID-19 cases.
It was now emphasized that it would be necessary to conduct an aggressive test similar to South Korea for COVID-19.
Public German broadcaster ARD praised the efficiency of the testing methods developed by South Korea, such as the drive-through COVID-19 screening.
Since March 8, Germany has been operating drive-through inspection stations in North Rhine-Westphalia and Hesse, where the number of infected people is increasing.
Drive-through inspection stations were also installed in several places in the UK two weeks ago.
Germany has a medical infrastructure capable of testing 16,000 people per day.
Bloomberg L.P. analyzed the reason for the low death rate in South Korea.
South Korea experienced serious difficulties during the outbreak of MERS in 2015 due to a lack of test kits.
Afterwards,  the country approved rapid deployment of COVID-19 test kits, and now they are able to test more than 10,000 people a day.
In neighboring Japan, only about 2,700 people in total have been tested for COVID-19 as of March 3.
Officials in Seoul operate "drive-thru" testing stations for quick testing.
Diagnostics company Seegene Inc. is also exporting its test kits to other countries including China, Europe and the USA.AFP attributed the factors behind the low death rate of South Korea to the rigorous testing and the infected population profile.
South Korea's widespread testing leads mild or asymptomatic cases to be identified so the proportion of dying goes down.
Moreover, the infected population in the South Korea has a unique profile.
Most of the country's infections are linked to the Shincheonji Church of Jesus and most of its members are young women.
Statistics show that the virus is most deadly among older generations and men.
So the death rate in South Korea is lower than other countries.
CNN reported the innovative drive-through testing for COVID-19 in the northern city of Goyang, which was inspired by the drive-through counters at Starbucks.Reuters detailed the new testing facilities in South Korea.
Several drive-through coronavirus screening centres were built, including roadside testing facilities.
Their purpose is to diagnose patients quickly, while preventing the infection of others in, e.g., a hospital waiting room or a community health center.
The entire testing procedure takes several minutes.
William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, stressed the importance of the broad testing efforts in South Korea.
It would provide us with an unclouded picture of the COVID-19 illness.
Victoria’s Chief Health Officer, Brett Sutton has recommended the drive-thru coronavirus testing in Australia.
on March 10, Australia opened the first drive-through testing station in Adelaide.
Business Insider analyzed the difference of coverage of patient testing patients for COVID-19, comparing the USA to South Korea.
Per million citizens, South Korea tested 700 times more than the USA.
Fortune explained South Korea's efforts of setting up several "drive-thru" coronavirus screening facilities as contributing to testing thousands of samples a day.
The Washington Post has praised the South Korean government's handling of coronavirus outbreak and stated that South Korea is a model for the U.S. response instead of Iran.
The Washington Post also appreciated South Korea's response as a successful model for democratic countries.Agence France-Presse has compared South Korea's handling of coronavirus outbreak with China.
The newspaper stated that "While China locked down cities, Seoul embraced widespread testing and public notice of movements of those infected, raising some privacy concerns".
Also, AFP analyzed that the South Korean government handled the crisis using a model of open information, public participation, and widespread testing.
Additionally, according to the paper, Masahiro Kami, a chairperson of the Tokyo-based Medical Governance Research Institute stated that South Korea is a good model for every country for handling the coronavirus outbreak.WSJ analyzed the aggressive Coronavirus Test Program in S.Korea.
The government contacted the citizens proactively to test the coronavirus in various ways including a home visit, a quick 10 minutes drop off drive-through COVID-19 testing center free of charge.
Although S.Korea not yet defeated the outbreak, experts credit the emphasis on energetic COVID-19 test program with reducing case numbers and fatalities.UPI has analyzed that South Korea's model has worked on handling coronavirus outbreak without any further harder restrictions on foreigners.
The paper also observed that Health authorities have aggressively promoted hygiene and social distancing.
Additionally, according to the paper Kim Jong-hwan, an administrator at Seoul Metropolitan Eosunpyeong Hospital positively evaluated the government's deal with coronavirus outbreak by stating that "The government's response has been so well-organized.
I'm proud of it."
Coronavirus diseases, a group of closely related syndromes
Li Wenliang, a doctor at Wuhan Central Hospital and first to describe the syndrome
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Italy
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Iran
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Japan
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Asia
Media related to COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea at Wikimedia Commons
2020 coronavirus pandemic in New Zealand
The first case of the global pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in New Zealand was reported on 28 February 2020.
A total of 66 cases have been confirmed as of 22 March 2020, along with four probable cases.
Cases have occurred in the Auckland, Wellington, Waikato, Northland, Taranaki, Bay of Plenty, Manawatū-Whanganui, and Hawke's Bay regions of the North Island, and the Nelson, Canterbury, Otago, and Southland regions of the South Island.
On 28 January, the Ministry of Health set up the National Health Coordination Centre (NHCC) in response to the outbreak.
An Infectious and Notifiable Diseases Order was issued to take effect from 30 January, which required health practitioners to report any suspected cases under the Health Act 1956.
On 3 February, the New Zealand Government announced that foreign travellers who left from China would be denied entry to New Zealand, with only New Zealand citizens and permanent residents and their family being allowed to enter.
Universities asked for the Government to exempt Chinese students who are travelling to study in New Zealand.
Foreigners who left China and spent at least 14 days in another country were permitted to enter New Zealand.
The ban was extended for an additional eight days on 24 February.On 4 February, the cruise ship Diamond Princess was quarantined by Japanese authorities in Yokohama after passengers were confirmed to have COVID-19.
Eleven New Zealanders were reported to be on board.
By 20 February, four New Zealand passengers had tested positive for the virus and were being treated in Japan.
Two of them had been due to travel on an evacuation flight being organised by the Australian government.On 5 February, a government-chartered flight operated by Air New Zealand arrived in Auckland from Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.
The city of Wuhan had been under lockdown since 23 January.
The flight carried 193 passengers, including 54 New Zealand citizens and 44 permanent residents.
Thirty-five Australian passengers were transferred to an Australian flight, while the remaining 157 passengers were quarantined in a military facility at Whangaparaoa for 14 days.
The passengers were subsequently released on 19 February.New Zealand confirmed its first case on 28 February, a New Zealand citizen in his 60s who had recently visited Iran, returning via Bali, Indonesia, and arriving in New Zealand on 26 February at Auckland.
He had two tests for COVID-19 that were negative, but a third test using a more specific sample was positive.
He was admitted to Auckland City Hospital.
New Zealand was the 48th country to have a confirmed case of COVID-19.
Also on 28 February, the Government extended the travel restrictions to include travellers coming from Iran.
On 4 March, a New Zealand woman in her 30s who had returned from northern Italy on 25 February was confirmed as the second case of the virus in New Zealand.
She had flown into Auckland via Singapore, and subsequently caught domestic flights to and from Palmerston North on 2 March.
Her partner also displayed symptoms of the virus, and was confirmed as the fourth case on 6 March.On 5 March, the third confirmed New Zealand case and the first case of local transmission was reported.
An Auckland man in his 40s was infected with COVID-19 by a family member who had returned from Iran on 23 February.
Three other members of his family had previously been unwell.
Two family members had arrived in New Zealand from Iran on 23 February.
On 7 March, a fifth case was announced, a woman in her 40s who was the partner of the third case.
One of the family members who had returned from Iran was the father of the third case, and is considered a probable case.On 6 March, the Ministry of Health said that eight people from New Zealand had been passengers on the 11–21 February cruise of Grand Princess from San Francisco to Mexico and back and may have been in contact with a confirmed case of COVID-19.
All eight had already returned to New Zealand.
One was a woman in her 70s who had been in hospital for a respiratory illness and was discharged and is considered a probable case.On 14 March, ahead of the first anniversary of the Christchurch mosque shootings that killed 51 people, a national remembrance service was cancelled out of concerns over the virus.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said the decision was a pragmatic one, adding, "We're very saddened to cancel [it], but in remembering such a terrible tragedy, we shouldn't create the risk of further harm being done."
In addition to the remembrance service, an Auckland festival celebrating Pacific culture was also cancelled.On 14 March, a sixth confirmed case was announced, an Auckland man in his 60s who had recently returned from the United States.
He went into self isolation.On 14 March, Ardern announced that, effective 01:00 on 16 March, all travellers arriving in or returning to New Zealand from outside of the country must self-isolate for 14 days.
This  applies to all travellers, even if they are New Zealand citizens, but excludes travel from the Pacific islands unless the traveller is symptomatic.
In addition, restrictions were placed on travel to the Pacific islands from New Zealand, barring travel to the region by those showing signs of coronavirus symptoms, as well as close contacts of coronavirus patients.
Cruise ships will be prohibited from docking in New Zealand until 30 June.
Ardern described these as being among the "widest ranging and toughest border restrictions of any country in the world".On 15 March, two more cases were confirmed, bringing the total number of infected in New Zealand to eight.
The seventh case was a man who travelled from Australia to Wellington.
The eighth case was of a woman who was a visitor from Denmark arriving in Auckland via Doha and then Christchurch, before driving on towards Queenstown, where she became ill and was hospitalised.On 17 March, four more cases were confirmed, bringing the total number of infected in New Zealand to 12.
The ninth and tenth cases were a Wellington man and his father, who had travelled back from the United States.
The eleventh case was a man from Dunedin, who had travelled back from Germany.
The twelfth case was a Dunedin high school student who was the son of the eleventh case.On 18 March, the Ministry of Health confirmed that New Zealand had eight new cases of the coronavirus, bringing the total to 20.
Four of these new cases were in Auckland, two in the Waikato region, one in Christchurch, and one in Invercargill.On 19 March, the Ministry of Health confirmed another eight new cases of the Coronavirus, bringing the total to 28.
Two of the new cases were in Auckland, two in Taranaki, one in Dunedin, one in Queenstown, one in Northland, and one in Rotorua.
On 20 March, the Ministry of Health confirmed 11 new cases of the Coronavirus, bringing the total to 39: five in Auckland, two in Waikato, two in Wellington, one in Canterbury, and one in Hawke's Bay.
All new cases were associated with overseas travel.On 21 March, 13 new cases were confirmed, bringing the total to 52.
For two of the cases, no link to overseas travel had been discovered and the Ministry of Health was continuing to investigate.On 22 March, 14 new cases were confirmed, bring the total to 66.
11 of the new cases had a history of international travel.
Two of the other cases had attended the World Hereford Conference in Queenstown, which was held on 9–13 March and had New Zealand and international delegates.
On 21 March at midday, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced the introduction of a country-wide alert level system, similar to the existing fire warning systems.
There are four levels, with 1 being the least risk of infection and 4 the highest.
Each level brings added restrictions on activities or movements.
Each region can have an individual alert level based on the severity of their own infections, and these levels can be changed at any time.
Levels are cumulative – each level includes the restrictions of the level below it.
Ardern stated that New Zealanders should always be prepared for the next level.
All of New Zealand is currently on Level 2.
Level 1 – The outbreak is contained, and there is little risk of infection to the community.
At this stage, preparation is key.
Border entry measures and contact tracing are active.
Mass gatherings over 500 are cancelled.
Level 2 – The outbreak is mostly contained, and there is a growing risk to the community.
Over 70s and those with immunity deficiencies or respiratory issues are advised to stay home.
If you can stay and work from home, you are advised to do so.
More border restrictions are active and limits on non-essential travel.
Further restrictions on mass gatherings are in effect.
Social distancing is encouraged.
Level 3 – The outbreak is growing, and there is a risk of infection to the public.
Affected educational facilities closed
Public venues closed
All mass gatherings cancelled.
Level 4 – The outbreak is growing significantly, and there is a very high risk of infection.
Everyone is instructed to stay home.
All educational facilities closed.
All businesses closed, except government-sanctioned firms, such as pharmacies and supermarkets.
Travel severely limited
Rationing of supplies and requisitioning of facilities
There is concern COVID-19 tests have been given only to people who have returned with symptoms from impacted countries or people who have been in contact with a confirmed case.
People with symptoms not fitting these categories have not been tested.NZ case definition for COVID-19 testing from 14 March:
symptoms (fever OR cough OR shortness of breath OR sore throat) AND travel history
symptoms (fever OR cough OR shortness of breath OR sore throat) AND close or causal contact with a suspect, probable or confirmed case
healthcare workers with pneumonia
people treated in intensive case units for severe respiratory illnessesFor cases not fitting this case definition doctors are encouraged to use their own judgement whether to test the patient or not.
Increased demand for face masks and hand sanitisers led to shortages nationwide in supermarkets and pharmacies.
Following the first New Zealand case of COVID-19 on 28 February, customers were reportedly panic-buying supplies at Auckland supermarkets.A Wellington iwi placed a taupāruru (restriction) on the practice of hongi, a traditional Māori greeting, in response to the outbreak.An Utting Research poll conducted on 1–2 March suggested that 47% were satisfied with the government's response to the COVID-19 outbreak, with 34% unsatisfied and 19% unsure.Following the implementation of stronger border controls, SANZAAR announced on 14 March that it would suspend play of its Super Rugby season (which features five New Zealand teams) following the conclusion of that weekend's matches.On 15 March it was announced that the Warbirds Over Wanaka 2020 airshow was cancelled due to the Government’s response to the pandemic.
This was the first time in the biennial event’s history that it had been cancelled.
On 16 March, national carrier Air New Zealand announced that it would be reducing its long haul capacity by 85% and its personnel by 30% in response to declining revenue as a result of the outbreak.
The airline suspended flights to several major international cities including San Francisco, Houston, Buenos Aires, Vancouver, Tokyo, Honolulu, Denpasar, and Taipei between 30 March and 30 June as well as its London–Los Angeles service.
In addition, domestic network capacity would be reduced in March and April 2020.
It would maintain enough overseas flights for returning New Zealanders and evacuees.On 16 March, Prime Minister Ardern called for a halt to public gatherings of more than 500 people and warned that the outbreak could lead to a recession greater than the 2008 global financial crisis.On 17 March, Health Minister David Clark announced that the Government would deport foreign tourists who flout self-quarantine restrictions.
That same day, Immigration New Zealand placed two foreign tourists into forced quarantine for defying Government requirements to self-quarantine for two weeks.
The tourists were ordered to leave New Zealand following their quarantine.On 17 March, Finance Minister Grant Robertson announced a NZ$12.1 billion Covid-19 business package that included $8.7 billion for businesses and jobs, $2.8 billion for income support, $500 million for health, and $600 million for the aviation sector and to support supply chains (this did not include any support for Air New Zealand).On 17 March, Logan Park High School in Dunedin closed for 48 hours after one of its students tested positive for the coronavirus.
That same day, Jon Landau, the co-producer of the Avatar film sequels, announced that film production at the Wellington-based Stone Street Studios had been suspended in response to the coronavirus outbreak.On 17 March, Newshub reported that the Australian Border Force had suspended the repatriation of New Zealand deportees between 16 and 30 March 2020 as a result of the coronavirus outbreak.On 17 March, the University of Canterbury became the first university in New Zealand to recall its exchange students from overseas, stating that "Given the rapidly escalating global situation and the increasing amount of travel restrictions worldwide, and intensive consultation with our partners, [we have] made the very difficult decision to suspend our exchange programmes and recall all UC outbound exchange students, effective immediately."On 18 March, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) urged all New Zealanders traveling overseas to return home.
In addition, Ardern announced that the New Zealand and Australian Governments would be cancelling Anzac Day services scheduled to be held at Gallipoli in Turkey in response to travel restrictions and the coronavirus outbreak.On 19 March, the Royal New Zealand Returned and Services' Association announced that all Anzac Day services, scheduled for 25 April, would be cancelled and the red poppy collection postponed due to the health risk.
This was the first time that Anzac Day services have not been held since 1916.On 19 March, the government required the cancellation of mass indoor events with more than 100 people.
These measures do not apply to workplaces, schools, supermarkets or public transport.On 19 March, Ardern announced the closure of New Zealand's borders to all but New Zealand citizens and residents, with effect after 11:59 pm on Thursday night.
Unlike the previous travel restrictions, this ban also includes Pacific Islanders.
Returning New Zealanders are required to self-isolate for 14 days upon entry.
The partners, legal guardians or any dependent children travelling with returning New Zealand can return but will need to self-isolate as well.
However, Samoan and Tongan citizens traveling to New Zealand for essential reasons, "essential health workers", and those seeking to enter the country for humanitarian reasons are exempt from the travel ban.On 20 March, the Government loaned Air New Zealand NZ$900 million to protect essential air routes and to keep the company operating.
That same day, the Auckland Council closed all public libraries, swimming pools, and recreational centres, including the Auckland Art Gallery and the New Zealand Maritime Museum.
Massey University stopped face-to-face teaching of courses that could be taught by distance.
The University of Auckland suspended classes for the week of 23–27 March to allow staff to prepare for remote teaching in the event of a partial campus closure.
The University of Otago in Dunedin has also shifted classes with more than 100 students online in a bid.On 21 March, Auckland University of Technology announced that it would be suspending teaching in response to a petition from students.
The University of Canterbury also announced they could move to online learning.
Several local body councils in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin, Lower Hutt and Porirua announced the closures of public facilities including swimming pools, libraries, recreation centres, community centres, art galleries, and museums.
As of 21 March 2020, there are 66 confirmed cases of coronavirus (COVID-19) in New Zealand:
24 in Auckland
9 in Waikato
9 in Wellington
7 in Otago
4 in Taranaki
3 in Canterbury
2 in Bay of Plenty
2 in Nelson
1 in Hawke's Bay
1 in SouthlandNo cases have been reported in Gisborne, Marlborough, Tasman, or West Coast.
Information on COVID-19 by the New Zealand Ministry of Health
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation reports by the World Health Organization (official numbers of confirmed cases by country)
Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases and historical data by Johns Hopkins University
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Canada
An ongoing worldwide pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a novel infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was first confirmed to have spread to Canada on January 27, 2020, after a man returned to Toronto from travel in China, including Wuhan.
As of March 21, 2020, there have been 1,237 confirmed cases in Canada, 14 recoveries, 18 deaths, and over 80,000 tests performed.
Most of those cases are in Ontario (377 cases, 3 deaths) and British Columbia (424 cases, 10 deaths).
Confirmed cases have been reported in all ten provinces of Canada, as well as in one of its three territories.
Thirteen cases have been repatriated from the Grand Princess cruise ship.
Until March, all cases were linked to recent travel to a country with a substantial number of cases.
The first case of community transmission in Canada was confirmed in British Columbia on March 5,  and Toronto's chief health officer announced on March 16 that there is "some evidence of community transmission".In mid-March, all of Canada's provinces and territories declared states of emergency.
Most provinces and territories have also implemented school and daycare closures, prohibitions on large gatherings, as well as the closure of various leisure and entertainment venues.
On March 16, Canada severely restricted its border access, barring travellers from all countries except the United States; on March 18, travellers from the United States were also banned in a mutual agreement with the US government (with exceptions in place for family members, essential employees who commute across the border and to ensure continued exchange of goods).
Travellers entering Canada have been advised to self-isolate for 14 days.
This requirement is legally enforced in Saskatchewan, as well as in Newfoundland and Labrador for both international and domestic travellers.
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's wife Sophie Grégoire Trudeau tested positive for the virus on March 12 and she and Trudeau went into self-isolation.
On January 15, the federal government activated its Emergency Operations Centre.On January 17, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) implemented signage in the Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver airports to raise awareness of the virus, and had added a health screening question to the electronic kiosks for passengers arriving from central China.
There are no direct flights from Wuhan to Canada.On January 23, the federal Minister of Health, Patty Hajdu, said that five or six people were being monitored for signs of the virus.On January 25, the first identified presumptive case in Canada was a male in his 50s who travelled between Wuhan and Guangzhou before returning to Toronto on January 22.
Canada issued a travel advisory against non-essential travel to China due to the outbreak, including a regional travel advisory to avoid all travel to the province of Hubei.
Federal health officials stated that the risk in Canada was low.
Final testing conducted at the National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg, Manitoba confirmed the presumptive case on January 27.On January 29, Minister of Foreign Affairs François-Philippe Champagne announced that an aircraft would be sent to repatriate Canadians from the areas affected by the virus in China.
On February 2, the Canadian Armed Forces announced that it planned to charter a plane to assist in the evacuation of Canadian nationals still in Wuhan once given authorization by China, intending to fly them to CFB Trenton for repatriation and medical screenings.
Only those that had entered the country with a Canadian passport would be allowed to take this flight.
The first plane landed at CFB Trenton on February 7.
On February 21, a chartered flight of 131 Canadians who were quarantined on the Diamond Princess after an outbreak on the cruise ship in Japan, and who all tested negative for the virus, were brought to CFB Trenton for additional screening before being transported by bus to the NAV Centre in Cornwall, Ontario to be quarantined.On February 26, Hajdu recommended that citizens stockpile food and medication, noting that it was "good to be prepared because things can change quickly [in any emergency]."
The recommendation faced criticism from politicians: Manitoba health minister Cameron Friesen and Ontario health minister Christine Elliott both felt that there was no need for such aggressive stockpiling, while Friesen also felt that there needed to be more coordination between the federal and provincial levels in terms of information regarding the outbreak.
Conservative Party shadow minister Matt Jeneroux opined that the suggestion incited concern and was lacking in transparency.
Health Canada's website recommended against such bulk purchases (as to not strain supply chains), and explained that having supplies on hand was to "ensure you do not need to leave your home at the peak of the outbreak or if you become ill."
Hajdu announced on March 6 that the federal government would offer $27 million in funding to 47 research groups at 19 universities, to develop means of managing the outbreak.
Minister of Finance Bill Morneau stated that the next federal budget would include measures in response to the outbreak, including an increase to the risk adjustment provision.On March 8, Champagne stated that at the request of the U.S. government, Canada had chartered a plane to evacuate the 237 citizens that were still aboard the cruise ship Grand Princess.
They were quarantined at CFB Trenton for two weeks when the plane landed on March 10.Member of Parliament Anthony Housefather announced on March 9 that he was undergoing self-isolation as a precautionary measure due to possible contact with a person at an American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) conference in Washington.
The next day, Minister of Natural Resources Seamus O'Regan stated that he was also in self-isolation while awaiting the results of a coronavirus test.
He had seen a doctor regarding a "persistent" head cold, who recommended testing, but was "not aware of contacting anyone infected".
The test came back negative.On March 11, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced a $1 billion response fund, including $500 million to go to provinces and territories, a $50 million contribution to the World Health Organization and an additional $275 million to fund coronavirus research in Canada.
Minister of Economic Development and Official Languages Mélanie Joly stated that she had been discussing means of mitigating the outbreak's impact on the air travel industry.On March 12, after returning from a speaking engagement in London, England, Trudeau's wife Sophie Grégoire Trudeau tested positive for the virus.
She and the Prime Minister went into self-isolation.
The next day, Trudeau also announced that the federal government was preparing a stimulus package to address those affected by the pandemic.On March 16, Trudeau announced that new entry restrictions would be implemented shortly after midnight ET on March 18, primarily restricting entry into the country to Canadian citizens and their immediate families, and permanent residents.
Most international flights are being routed to Canada's major airports in order to enhance screening measures.
Minister of Foreign Affairs François-Philippe Champagne also announced that for citizens who are still abroad, the country would provide emergency loans of up to $5,000 to cover travel costs or basic needs until they are able to return.
The federal government's pandemic response is based on two primary documents: the Canadian Pandemic Influenza Preparedness planning guidelines, which outlines risks and measures to address a viral disease, and the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Biological Events, which includes identifying, tracking, and ensuring rapid access to medical care.
As of February 27, the response plan was at level 3 (escalated).
The federal government activated its Emergency Operations Centre on January 15.On March 18, the federal Minister of Health, Patty Hajdu, announced that the federal government had signed an interim order to speed up access to COVID-19 test kits that will allow provincial labs to increase testing.
The test kits are made by Switzerland-based Roche Molecular Systems and ThermoFisher Scientific.
According to Health Canada, "an Interim Order is one of the fastest mechanisms available to the Government of Canada to help make health products available to address larger scale public health emergencies.
This Interim Order provides the Minister with the flexibility to consider the urgent circumstances relating to the need for the medical device, authorizations granted by foreign regulatory authorities, or possible new uses for medical devices that are approved in Canada."Theresa Tam, Chief Public Health Officer of Canada and head of the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), said on March 19 that Canada will not know for two or three weeks if country-wide social distancing efforts have curbed the spread of COVID-19.On March 19, 2020, the federal government announced that it had added to Trudeau's March 11 announcement of $275M in coronavirus funding for an additional 49 projects to bring the total to 96 research projects that will focus on developing and implementing measures to detect, manage, and reduce the transmission of the virus.On March 20, as part of the announcement on Canada's industrial strategy (see below), Trudeau stated that the National Research Council will work with small- and medium-sized companies on health research to fight the virus.
On March 14, Canada recommended against international travel, and advised those returning from outside of Canada, except for essential workers (such as flight crew), to self-isolate for 14 days.
On March 16, Canada has severely restricted its border access, only allowing Canadian citizens and their immediate families, permanent residents, and U.S. citizens to enter the country.
The only exceptions are flight crews, diplomats, and trade and commerce.
No one showing symptoms of the virus are allowed to board flights into Canada, regardless of their citizenship.
International flights to Canada from outside the Caribbean, Mexico, and the U.S. were instructed to land at only one of four airports: Calgary International Airport, Montréal–Trudeau International Airport, Toronto Pearson International Airport, and Vancouver International Airport.On March 18, Trudeau announced that Canada and the U.S. agreed to temporarily restrict all non-essential travel across the border, while maintaining supply chains between both countries; this measure took effect at midnight on March 20.
A First Ministers' meeting scheduled for March 12 and 13 was cancelled after Trudeau and his wife Sophie Grégoire self-isolated.
The Canadian House of Commons was suspended between March 14 and April 20, immediately after passing the new North American free trade deal.
The federal budget, previously scheduled for March 20, was also suspended.
The Bank of Canada has twice lowered its overnight rate target by 50 basis points, first to 1.25 percent, and then to 0.75 percent, citing the "negative shocks to Canada's economy arising from the COVID-19 pandemic and the recent sharp drop in oil prices.
On March 18, the federal government announced an $82-billion response package that includes measures ranging from wage subsidies and income supports to a temporary boost to the child benefit program.
Payment and interest on federal student loan debt is being waived for six months.
The Canadian income tax filing deadline of April 30, 2020 was extended to June 1, 2020.
On March 16, the Treasury Board urged Federal public servants to work from home if possible.
No date was provided for when this provision should end.
On March 20 the government announced a plan to ramp up production of medical equipment, switching assembly lines to produce ventilators, masks and other personal protective gear.
Companies will be able to access funds through the government's Strategic Innovation Fund.
The PM started that Canadian medical supply firms Thornhill Medical, Medicom and Spartan Bioscience were looking to expand production.
According to Innovation, Science and Industry minister Navdeep Bains, "the country's entire industrial policy will be refocused to prioritize the fight against COVID-19".
On March 12, 2020, Alberta announced a ban on all meetings of more than 250 people.
It also recommended against international travel, and requested that any Albertans returning from international travel self-isolate for fourteen days.On March 13, 2020, the Alberta Court of Queen's Bench announced that all jury trials scheduled to begin after that date have been postponed.
Jury trials which are in process will continue.
British Columbia health officer Bonnie Henry recommended against non-essential travel outside the province on March 12.
This was followed the next day by a recommended self-quarantine of all travellers from outside the country, with the exception of health care workers.
At this point, this restriction is not legally binding.
BC also banned all gatherings of 50 people or more.
Manitoba's initial response to the first coronavirus cases in the province was to recommend against international travel, and to ask anyone returning from traveling to self-isolate for fourteen days.However, on March 20, 2020, Premier Brian Pallister announced a state of emergency under the provincial Emergency Measures Act, effective for 30 days.
The order restricted public gatherings to no more than 50 people, required retail stores and public transit to enforce social distancing, limited hospitality businesses and theatres to 50 people  or half their normal capacity, whichever is less, and shut down all fitness facilities.
Breaches of the order could trigger fines of up to $50,000 or six months imprisonment.
While outlining the need for social distancing measures, Pallister also emphasised the need to keep in touch with each other.
"Social distancing does not mean social isolation," he said.
Referring to particularly vulnerable friend and family members, he said: "Contact them, make sure that they have a sense of being connected to you.
Make sure that they're able to be confident that they're part of a world that isn't just their room."On March 21, a drive-through testing centre opened in Winnipeg, at a site close to the Victoria General Hospital.
As with walk-in testing centres, a referral will be necessary to use the drive-through testing centre.
As of March 21, 2020, there were four other walk-in test centres in Winnipeg, as well as test centres in Brandon, Thompson, Selkirk, Flin Flon, Steinbach and The Pas.
On March 13, the provincial government announced that all New Brunswick schools would shut down until March 30.
Day cares were not affected by the announcement at the time but are now closed, as of March 16, 2020.
On March 16, the chief medical officer of health Dr. Jennifer Russell recommended that all public spaces and certain business should close starting on March 17,  They also asking restaurant owners to limit the number of customers to 50 per cent of the capacity of their dining areas.
Take-out orders, deliveries and drive-through services would be permitted.
The government also announced that all non-essential government services to shut down until further notice.
On March 19, New Brunswick Premier Blaine Higgs declared a state of emergency in the province, widening the list of closures.
On March 18, Health Minister John Haggie declared a public health emergency in the province, ordering that all travellers returning from outside of the country must self-isolate for 14 days.
Arenas, bars, cinemas, and fitness facilities were ordered closed, and restaurants may only operate at half capacity.
These requirements are punishable by fines of $2,500 and up to six months imprisonment for individuals and  $50,000 for corporations, and they will multiply after each violation.
On March 20, the province extended legally-required self-isolation to any traveller returning to the province—including domestic travel.
On March 18, the Northwest Territories announced a public health emergency to be in effect until April 1.
On March 20, the government announced the closure of its borders, starting on March 21, with only limited exceptions.
Those allowed in would have to self-quarantine for 14 days.The government has announced a coronavirus relief package of $13.2 million.
The relief measures also include deferring payments normally owed to the government, deferral of student loan payments, and increased funding for social assistance.
The first presumptive cases in Nova Scotia were announced by the provincial chief medical officer of health on March 16, 2020.On March 17, the province banned gatherings of more than 50 people, ordered the closure of bars, and restricted restaurants to take-out service only.
The next day, Nova Scotia also ordered all gyms and personal service facilities (such as barber shops, spas, and tattoo parlors) to close.On March 22, Nova Scotia declared a state of emergency with major restrictions; all groups larger than 5 are prohibited, all provincial parks are closed effective immediately, and beginning March 23, screenings will be required at any point of entry into Nova Scotia, and anyone entering the province (even domestically, except those who are delivering goods and services into the province) will be legally required to self-isolate for 14 days.
In addition, law enforcement is authorised to enforce fines for individuals and businesses who contravene orders made by the chief medical officer of health.
Nunavut's Chief Public Health officer Michael Patterson has asked non-essential people from outside the territory not to travel to Nunavut, with anyone who does asked to self-isolate for 14 days.
On March 18, 2020 Inuit in Rankin Inlet blocked the road leading to the local goldmine in an effort to keep their region COVID-19 free.On March 18, the Nunavut Minister of Health announced that the territorial government had declared a state of public health emergency, on the advice of the Chief Public Health Officer.
In explaining the decision, the Chief Public Health Officer stated that while there were no reported cases in Nunavut, "If we wait for COVID-19 to be in town to adjust our activities, it will be too late."
Measures announced including encouraging self-isolation, closing bars, and reducing non-essential medical treatments.
On March 16, 2020, Premier Dennis King announced that the provincial Cabinet had declared a state of public health emergency under the Public Health Act.
The declaration of emergency gave special powers to the Chief Public Health Officer of the province, who will be able to issue orders to refrain from attending any public gatherings, align resources to where they are needed most, and manage hospitals and other health care facilities and ambulance services.The Premier also announced that Cabinet had established a $25 million dollar COVID contingency fund, and was also exploring other options, such as monitoring supply chains, exploring compensation for childcare staff, and reducing government activities to reduce interaction with the public.
Ontario has announced it has a dedicated web page updated 3 times daily with the cumulative total and new cases.
In addition, they have been making new releases as cases are confirmed, with their source whether they are due to travel history or close contact.On March 12, the Government of Ontario announced publicly funded schools would be closed for an additional two weeks after March Break until April 5.
On March 15, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice announced a suspension of most criminal matters, including trials until the end of May.On March 17, the Government of Ontario declared a state of emergency requiring all libraries, private schools, child care centres, concert venues, movie theatres, bars and restaurants that do not offer take out and delivery services, to close immediately.
This included prohibition of all public events of over 50 people.
On March 11, Premier François Legault recommended that a 14-day quarantine be imposed on all students and faculty returning from school trips to countries strongly affected by the pandemic (such as China and Italy), even if there are no signs of symptoms, and the cancellation of upcoming trips to such locations.
The same day, New Frontiers School Board stated that it had asked 18 students and two staff members of Howard S. Billings Regional High School — who had recently returned from a trip to Italy — to stay home from school until further notice.
New Frontiers stated that this decision was a precautionary measure based on Legault's recommendation.
A teacher from Kénogami Secondary School, and a teacher and a student from Arvida Multipurpose School who had also returned from Italy, were also asked to quarantine.
The same day, Collège International Marie de France also suspended classes, pending the testing of a student who was suspected to have coronavirus.On March 12, Premier Legault announced that the province would take more stringent measures to control its spread, including a ban on indoor gatherings of more than 250 people, and that government workers returning from international travel, including teachers, would be required to self-isolate for 14 days upon return.
Legault advised residents that show flu-like symptoms, or have recently returned from international travel, to also do so.On March 13, a large number of precautionary cancellations and closures began to emerge across the province, including both Montreal and Quebec City's St. Patrick's Day parades (the former for the first time in its 196-year history), all public events of the province's ruling Coalition Avenir Québec party, all Montreal Symphony Orchestra concerts scheduled through April 5 (including a planned performance at New York City's Carnegie Hall), and all Grand Théâtre de Québec events through March 29. Mayor of Montreal Valérie Plante announced the closure of public facilities effective March 13, such as arenas, libraries, sports facilities, and swimming pools, as well as the Montreal Botanical Garden and Planétarium de Montréal.On March 14, Legault announced that Quebec would prohibit visits to long-term care facilities and hospitals, and advised those 70 and over to avoid leaving their homes.
Later that day, the government announced that it would offer free emergency childcare services for people working in essential services, with up to 60,000 spots available, using the up to 400 schools that the government had closed.
By the evening of March 14, it was reported that the city of Montreal would be dispatching employees to Montréal–Trudeau International Airport to advise travellers arriving from international destinations to self-quarantine for 14 days, frustrated with inaction from the federal government, which is responsible for the airport.Further restrictions were announced by Premier Legault on March 15, who ordered the closure of various leisure and entertainment venues, including but not limited to bars, cinemas, gyms, pools, and ski hills.
Restaurants were also ordered to reduce their capacity by half and enforce social distancing.On March 18 the province of Quebec announced its first COVID-19 fatality, a senior who lived in Lanaudière and had contact with people who had recently travelled abroad.The government announced that it would extend the income tax filing deadline and inject $2.5 billion into companies suffering liquidity problems due to the COVID-19 crisis.
It also asked Quebecers not to travel between regions.
As of March 19, Quebec residents in isolation or quarantine that are not covered by any benefits can apply for 573$ per week of financial aid.
The city of Montreal also announced its own measures: extending the city's tax deadline and unveiling a $5-million emergency fund to support small- and medium-size businesses.
Citing concerns over the potential of an impending outbreak in the province, Premier Scott Moe announced on March 12 that he would not pursue a snap provincial election.
Saskatchewan's next general election is scheduled for October 26, 2020.On March 13, 2020, following the second presumptive case in the province, its government announced restrictions on gatherings of more than 250 people in contiguous indoor space, as well as gatherings of more than 50 people if they include participants who had recently travelled internationally.
Exceptions are permitted for retail shops.
An exception for faith-based organizations was removed March 16.As an employer, the government of Saskatchewan has sharply reduced inter-provincial and international travel on government business by any provincial employees.
It has also provided that provincial employees who have travelled outside the country, whether on government business or personal travel, must self-isolate for fourteen days upon their return.On March 17, 2020, the government announced that it was delaying the introduction of the provincial budget, because the government revenue forecasts underlying it were no longer reliable, in light of the current situation.
The Government would announce the planned spending, including for the health care sector, which would see an increase in funding.
The same day, the Legislature passed amendments to provincial employment law, to provide unpaid job security to employees during the pandemic.
The amendments passed with the support of both parties.
The next day, the Legislature adjourned its spring sitting, with the consent of the Opposition.Saskatchewan declared a state of emergency on March 18, which included a ban of all gatherings of 50 people or more, restricting capacity of restaurants and similar venues to a maximum of 50 or half (whichever is lower), mandatory closure of all fitness facilities, casinos, and bingo halls, shifting all provincial government entities and crown corporations to remote work on March 23, authorizing the Saskatchewan Health Authority to "redeploy nurses and other staff and ensure medical supplies and personal protective equipment are available when needed and reduce risk of further exposure to our care providers and patients", and advising against non-essential travel outside of the province.On March 20, Premier Moe signed an order making orders issued pursuant to the state of emergency, issued by the government or chief medical officer, enforceable under provincial law.
Law enforcement agencies were granted the authority to enforce these measures, which can be punishable by fines or arrest.
The government subsequently announced that all travellers returning to Saskatchewan from outside of the country (including the United States) are legally required to self-isolate for 14 days, punishable by $2,000 fine.
Essential travellers such as working crews, transport workers and health care workers are exempt.
Effective March 23, all gatherings of 25 people or more are prohibited unless all patrons are capable of maintaining a distance of 2 metres from each other.
Restaurants, bars and nightclubs must transition to takeout service only; bars and nightclubs may only do so if patrons are capable of maintaining a distance of 2 metres from each other.
All recreational, entertainment, and personal service facilities must close.The same day, the provincial capital of Regina, Saskatchewan also declared a state of emergency with stricter restrictions taking effect for seven days, banning all public meetings larger than 5 people or more (outside of home or workplace, or essential services), ordering the closure of non-essential retail stores in specific categories to in-person shopping (including clothing, furniture, games, sporting goods, and toys) effective March 23, and the immediate closure of all restaurants, bars, and nightclubs not offering takeout service, and dentists to non-emergency procedures.
Mayor Michael Fougere stated that he hoped that the provincial government "will look at [these restrictions] over time and say it would agree with [them]."
Orders by the provincial government take precedence over municipal orders; Government Relations Minister Lori Carr acknowledged Mayor Fougere's intentions, but that "during this time of great uncertainty, it is of the utmost importance that we provide certainty to Saskatchewan residents and make every effort to minimize confusion."
On March 18, 2020, Yukon declared a public health emergency.
Although there are no reported cases in Yukon, over 100 people have been tested.
As a result of the declaration of an emergency, schools are closed until after the Easter break, indoor public recreation facilities will be closed, and hospitals will be closed to visitors, with limited exceptions.
Courts across the country instituted measures to reduce public contact, while maintaining access to the courts.
The Supreme Court of Canada has closed the building to public tours, while maintaining the ability to file documents for cases electronically.
It has also adjourned appeals which were to be heard in March, to dates in June.
Other courts have prioritised the cases which will be heard, generally giving priority to ongoing criminal trials and trials in family and child protection matters, while adjourning most pending cases to later dates.
On March 19, the Pimicikamak Cree Nation restricted entry to essential travellers, and Chief David Monias said the Sayisi Dene and others are doing the same.
The Council of the Haida Nation said it was discouraging all non-resident travel to the islands “for the time being.”
Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Nunavut, Quebec  and Saskatchewan have closed schools for extended periods.On March 12, the Ontario government announced that all public schools will be closed from March 14 to April 5, for two weeks after the March break.On March 12, Laurentian University suspended classes and moved to online instruction.
This was then followed by many universities in Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, and Manitoba voluntarily cancelling classes and moving online.
In British Columbia, the ban on gatherings of 250 people or more has resulted in the cancellation of in-person classes with more than 250 students.On March 13, the Manitoba Minister of Education announced that all schools will be closed for three weeks beginning March 23 (an extra week before and after Spring break).
All after-school activities will be cancelled for the week leading up to the shutdown.In Quebec, many public and private schools announced that they would voluntarily close on March 13.
On March 13, Premier Legault ordered the closure of all daycares, schools, and post-secondary institutions in the province for two weeks beginning March 16.On March 15, Alberta ordered, until further notice, all daycares to close, all K-12 schools to suspend classes and close to students, and all post-secondary institutions to suspend in-person classes and switch to online classes.
Grade 12 diploma exams will still occur.In Saskatchewan, the University of Regina and University of Saskatchewan voluntarily suspended in-person classes on March 16, and will switch to online courses for the remainder of the semester.
On March 16, the province announced that all public schools will "wind down" over the week, and close indefinitely on March 20.
No academic penalties will be issued for students that do not attend school during the week of March 20, final grades will be issued based on existing progress, and eligible Grade 12 students will be able to graduate.In Newfoundland and Labrador, Memorial University announced that classes would be suspended from March 18–22, 2020, and continue without in-person classes thereafter.
On March 16, the province announced that all schools, early childhood education centres and regulated daycare centres are closing.The University of British Columbia, Simon Fraser University, Trinity Western University, and University of Victoria all announced they were completing their semesters online.
The Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) was affected strongly by the 2020 stock market crash, with an overall 12% decline on March 12 of the S&P/TSX Composite Index, its biggest single-day decline since 1940, twice triggering market circuit breakers.
The week of March 9–13 was the TSX's worst week on record.
The fall, which capped two weeks of steady declines, was exacerbated by an oil output war between Russia and Saudi Arabia.The S&P/TSX Composite Index lost another 10% on March 16, causing trading to halt a 3rd time in a span of eight days.
The index closed at 12,360.40 points on March 16, down over 30% from before the crash at 17,944 recorded on February 20.
At least one insurance carrier announced that it was cutting back on insurance coverage for Canadians abroad.
On March 15, 2020, RSA Canada announced that trip cancellation, interruption, and emergency medical coverage was now limited to 10 days from the federal government's announcement on March 13, 2020, urging Canadians not to travel internationally.
WestJet has frozen all hiring and is offering voluntary departure packages to employees, with the goal of cutting 12% of its total capacity.
Air Canada announced on March 20 that it will lay of 5,000 of its staff.
The federal government saw a dramatic increase in applications to unemployment insurance, with over 500,000 Canadians applying in a single week (an 18-fold increase).
Air Canada and WestJet have cancelled most flights to Beijing, Shanghai, and Rome; and cut back on flights to Hong Kong, Tokyo, and Seoul, with WestJet announcing on March 16 that all international flights, including to the US, will be suspended by March 22.
On March 18, regional carrier Porter Airlines announced that it would suspend all flights until June.
In a similar move, Air Canada announced on March 18 that by April 1 all international flights will be suspended, with only 6 airports outside the US and 13 US airports still being serviced.
These "air-bridges" (to London, Paris, Frankfurt, Delhi, Tokyo and Hong Kong) will allow Canadians to return home and are operated at least until April 31.Only Vancouver International Airport, Toronto Pearson International Airport, Montreal-Pierre Elliot Trudeau International Airport, and Calgary International Airport still accept international flights.
Multiple fast casual restaurants, including Starbucks and Tim Hortons, have suspended the allowable use of reusable cups by patrons.
Tim Hortons simultaneously altered its popular "Roll up the Rim to Win" promotion to a digital-only model (the chain had already announced its intent to increase its use of digital components for the promotion in an effort to combat litter).
Both Starbucks and Tim Hortons subsequently announced on March 15 and 16 respectively, that they would both suspend in-store dining and seating.The major movie theatre chains Cineplex Entertainment and Landmark initially restricted the capacity of their individual cinema auditoriums by half (with Landmark using its reserved seating systems to also enforce social distancing, and enforcing a single use of each disposable cup or popcorn bag by using new ones for refills).
On March 16, both chains announced that all locations will be closed until further notice, with Cineplex targeting an April 2 reopening.
Most cancellations occurred on or after March 12, when several provinces implemented bans on gatherings of 250 or more people.
Cancelled cultural events include such awards ceremonies as the 2020 Juno Awards, scheduled to have been in Saskatoon on March 15,  the 8th Canadian Screen Awards (Toronto, March 29), the 15th Canadian Folk Music Awards (Charlottetown, April 3 and 4), and the Artis Awards (Montreal, May 10).Festival cancellations or postponements include the Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival, originally planned in Toronto from April 30 to May 10, and Montreal's Festival international du film sur l'art, which will now be presented online.
CBC Radio's Canada Reads book competition, scheduled for the week of March 16, was also postponed.Canada's national museums in Ottawa cancelled all scheduled events and exhibits, and closed indefinitely on March 14.
Almost all local museums, art galleries, theatres, and other performance venues across the country have also closed indefinitely.
Shopify cancelled its Shopify Unite conference, which was scheduled to occur from May 6 to 9 in Toronto.
All professional and university sports leagues with Canadian teams have suspended their seasons from March 13 onward.
This includes the National Hockey League, the Canadian Hockey League, Hockey Canada, the Canadian Junior Hockey League, USports ice hockey, the National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball, Major League Soccer, the Canadian Premier League, the Canadian Soccer Association, and the CONCACAF Champions League.
As of March 19, the Canadian Football League is limiting player access to training facilities and considering contingency plans for the 2020 CFL season.Cancelled international sports events in Canada include the 2020 World Women's Curling Championship (originally scheduled to be held from March 14 to 22 in Prince George), the 2020 World Figure Skating Championships (March 16 to 22, Montreal), as well as the 2020 Women's Ice Hockey World Championships (March 31 to April 10, Halifax and Truro, Nova Scotia).
Cancelled national competitions include the 2020 Arctic Winter Games (March 15 to 21, Whitehorse) and Nordiq Canada's Canadian Ski Championships (March 25 to April 2, Vernon, British Columbia).Three upcoming national soccer team matches that were scheduled to be played in British Columbia were cancelled: two senior men's international friendlies on March 27 and 31 in Langford, and a senior women's international friendly on April 14 in Vancouver.CBC Television responded to the suspension of NHL play by replacing its weekly broadcast of Hockey Night in Canada with a Saturday night lineup of Canadian films, Movie Night in Canada.
Almost all tourist sites have been closed or reduced due to the outbreak.Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, and Saskatchewan have ordered the closure of all casinos until further notice.
Great Canadian Gaming voluntarily closed its 10 locations in BC (prior to the mandated closure), and 3 in the Atlantic provinces.
The Atlantic Lottery and Loto-Québec also suspended and disabled their video lottery terminals starting March 16.
Many news websites have dropped their paywalls to provide coverage of the outbreak including The Globe and Mail and all Postmedia sites.
Public broadcaster CBC has replaced its local evening TV news with a CBC News Network telecast combining content from local and national journalists from across the country, a decision that was criticized by P.E.I. premier Dennis King, as CBC News: Compass is the province’s only local daily television news program.The National Arts Centre launched #CanadaPerforms, a $100,000 fund that would pay Canadian musicians $1,000 to perform a livestreamed concert on Facebook during the crisis.
The initiative launched on March 19 with a concert by Jim Cuddy, with other artists already scheduled to perform including Serena Ryder, William Prince, Irish Mythen, Erin Costelo and Whitehorse.
As of March 15, Alberta has reported 56 cases, and has completed 10,524 tests.
The first case was a tourist who was repatriated from the Grand Princess to Calgary.
As of March 16, cases have been reported in every Alberta zone.
Community transmission was first reported on March 15, but is so far limited to seven people, six of whom attended a dental conference held from March 5 to 7 at the Vancouver Convention Centre.
which had By March 17, there are 23 new cases representing the "largest day-over-day increase yet in the province" resulting in total of 97 people in Alberta with the virus.
Alberta reported 22 new cases for a total of 119 people testing positive for COVID-19.
Almost 15,000 tests had been performed.On March 19, 2020, chief medical officer Deena Hinshaw announced the first death in the province.
As of March 21, 2020, British Columbia has reported 424 cases, 6 recoveries, and 10 deaths.
Additionally, the provincial government has announced that 17,912 people have been tested for the virus in British Columbia as of that date.The first case in British Columbia was reported on January 28.
The person had returned from Wuhan and began experiencing symptoms on January 26.
The first case in BC's interior was reported on February 14.
The person had recently returned from China.
The first case in the Fraser Health region was reported on February 20.
This was also the first BC case where the person had travelled to or from Iran.The first two cases in the Lynn Valley Care Centre in North Vancouver were reported on March 7.
One resident and one staff member were diagnosed.
The staff member is now thought to be Canada's first case of community transmission.
This care centre became Canada's worst outbreak, with 16 cases to date, and may be linked to subsequent cases in another seniors' home and a hospital in North Vancouver.On March 9, the Lynn Valley outbreak resulted in the first coronavirus death in Canada, by a man in his 80s with pre-existing health conditions.
Three more deaths at the centre were reported on March 16.
An additional 2 deaths were reported at the centre on March 17, while another was reported on March 19.The seventh death was reported to have occurred "in [a] hospital in the Fraser Health region".BC's first two cases linked to the Grand Princess were also reported on March 7.
They were hospitalized.
As of March 15, Manitoba has reported 7 cases, with the first three reported on March 12.
All cases have been linked to international travel.
All of Winnipeg's cases were identified after March 12.
In total, 403 people have been tested in Manitoba.
The rate of testing was increased to more than 500 tests a day on March 14.In Manitoba's first case, the person had returned to Winnipeg from the Philippines, and self-isolated at home.
All subsequent cases were found in Winnipeg.
As of March 17, New Brunswick has reported eight cases, 2 confirmed, and 6 presumptive, with the first one reported on March 11.
An additional 196 tests came out negative.In New Brunswick's first case, the person had returned to southeastern New Brunswick from France, and self-isolated at home.
The second case was a close contact.On March 15, the province reported four more presumptive cases in the central part of the province.On March 16, New Brunswick confirmed one more case, and announced one more presumptive case, making 2 confirmed cases and 5 presumptive in total.On March 17, an eighth case was announced.
This is the first child in the province to become infected.
On March 14, a presumptive case was announced in Newfoundland and Labrador.
On March 21, the Northwest Territories reported its first case of COVID-19; the individual had travelled to British Columbia and Alberta before returning home to Yellowknife.
On March 15, 2020, three presumptive cases in Nova Scotia were announced.
All three were travel-related.
By March 22, the number of cases in the province had risen to 28.
As of March 20, 2020, Ontario, the province with the first case in the country, has reported 368 cases with 6 recoveries and 3 fatalities.
Most cases to date have been linked to international travel, including local conferences with international attendees, however at least three cases are being investigated for community transmission.
In total, 9415 people have tested negative, while 1567 continue to be investigated.The first case in Canada, was reported on January 25 in Toronto.
The person had recently returned from Wuhan, China, and had taken precautions in returning.
After admission to hospital, the person made a full recovery by February 23.
Further cases imported from other countries were reported later in February, with the first case from Iran reported on February 26, Egypt on February 27, Grand Princess Cruise on March 7, the United States on March 7, France and Germany on March 8, Switzerland on March 10, and Austria on March 11.On March 12, Sophie Gregoire Trudeau, the wife of Canada's prime minister Justin Trudeau, became Canada's first UK-linked case.
Both she and the prime minister started self-isolation.Ontario reported its first death on March 17, a man in his 70s in Barrie, Ontario.
A second death, a man in his 50s in Milton, Ontario, was reported on March 19.
On March 14, 2020, the first confirmed case in Prince Edward Island was announced, a woman in her 50s who had returned from a trip on a cruise ship on March 7.
The province confirmed its first case on February 28—a 41-year-old woman from Montreal who had returned from Iran on the 24th on a flight from Doha, Qatar.
She was transferred to Jewish General Hospital on March 3, and released on March 4; since then, she has remained in isolation at her home in Verdun.
On March 5, the Ministry of Health and Social Services announced a second presumptive case, involving a man who had travelled to India in February, and was being treated in Mont-Laurier for symptoms similar to coronavirus.
On March 4, the person was transferred to Jewish General Hospital, where he was diagnosed with pneumonia.
Hours afterwards, a third presumptive case was confirmed, involving a woman who had returned from France on March 3.A fourth case was confirmed March 8, involving a woman from Montérégie, Longueuil who had recently returned from a cruise that had visited Mexico.
On March 10, authorities stated that the person had used public transit between February 24 and March 6, and had went through the Berri-UQAM, Champ-de-Mars, and Longueuil metro stations.
Premier François Legault initially classified the threat posed by the virus as being "weak".On March 9, a Montreal resident who had recently returned from Ireland was reported as a fifth presumptive case.
Four new cases were confirmed on March 11, including one who had returned from Caribbean and Miami, a man that had returned from the Dominican Republic, a person who had returned from Italy, and a resident of Montreal who had returned from international travel.By March 18, 94 confirmed cases had been reported in Quebec.
The province also had its first death.On March 20, a woman who tested positive for the coronavirus, was arrested for being out in Quebec City's Limoilou neighbourhood despite being under a quarantine order; this was the first time that this type of warrant was executed.
As of March 22, 2020, there have been 33 confirmed and 19 presumptive cases of coronavirus in Saskatchewan.
Saskatchewan's Chief Medical Officer Saqib Shahab announced the first presumptive case of in the province on March 12, a person in their 60s that had recently returned from Egypt, who was tested on March 9, and was in self-isolation at their home.
Two cases involved attendees of the aforementioned dental conference in Vancouver.
Eleven Saskatchewan health care employees tested positive after attending a physicians' bonspiel at a curling club in Edmonton on the week of March 11.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Outbreak update Health Canada
Community-based measures to mitigate the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Canada
Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases and historical data by Johns Hopkins University
Map of COVID-19 cases in Canada at a regional level and related closures
Map of Coronavirus COVID-19 Confirmed Cases in Canada by Empower Health (empower.ca / iamsick.ca)
CoronaMapper – Map with several updated statistics
Covid Canada – Bar graph of per province stats and live news feed
2020 coronavirus pandemic in the Philippines
As of March 22, 2020, there have been 380 confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the Philippines.
Out of the 380 cases, 25 deaths, and 17 recoveries were recorded.
The first case was confirmed on January 30, that of a 38-year-old Chinese woman who was confined in the San Lazaro Hospital in Manila.
The second case was confirmed on February 2, that of a 44-year-old Chinese man who died a day earlier, which was also the first confirmed death from the disease outside mainland China.
The first case of someone with no travel history abroad was confirmed on March 5, a 62-year-old male who frequented a Muslim prayer hall in San Juan, Metro Manila, raising suspicions that a community transmission of COVID-19 is already underway in the Philippines.
The man's wife was confirmed to have contracted COVID-19 on March 7, which was also the first local transmission to be confirmed.
The largest increase of the number of confirmed cases was on March 21, when 77 new cases were announced.The Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) in Muntinlupa, Metro Manila, is the medical facility where suspected cases are being tested for COVID-19 infection since January 30, 2020.
Prior to that date, confirmatory tests were made abroad.
Several measures were imposed to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 in the Philippines, including bans on travel to mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and South Korea.
On March 7, 2020, the Department of Health (DOH) raised its "Code Red Sub-Level 1," with a recommendation to the President of the Philippines to impose a "public health emergency" authorizing the DOH to mobilize resources for the procurement of safety gear and the imposition of preventive quarantine measures.
On March 9, President Rodrigo Duterte issued Proclamation No. 922, declaring the country under a state of public health emergency.
On March 12, President Duterte declared "Code Red Sub-Level 2," issuing a partial lockdown on Metro Manila and extending the metropolis' class suspensions up to April 12, to prevent a nationwide spread of COVID-19.
The class suspensions were later extended up to April 14 through a memorandum circular released by Malacañang on March 14.
On March 16, the entirety of Luzon has been placed under an "enhanced community quarantine."
On March 17, President Duterte issued Proclamation No. 929, declaring the Philippines under a state of calamity for a tentative period of six months.The Philippine government has repatriated some of its citizens across different international locations, all of whom were later quarantined at the New Clark City in Tarlac.
January 30
The first case of the disease was confirmed in the Philippines.
The Research Institute for Tropical Medicine began conducting confirmatory tests for the disease.
Prior to this date, confirmatory tests were conducted abroad.
February 2 – The first death from the disease in the Philippines was confirmed.
This death is the first confirmed death outside the Chinese mainland.
February 5
The first confirmed case of a Filipino citizen outside the Philippines was announced.
The case is of a crew member of the cruise ship Diamond Princess quarantined off the coast of Yokohama, Japan.
The third case in the country was confirmed.
February 9–22 – Repatriates from Wuhan were quarantined at the New Clark City in Capas, Tarlac.
None of them displayed any symptoms during the quarantine period and was released after they were cleared for the disease.
March 5–6 – The fourth and fifth cases were confirmed on March 5 and were announced on March 6.
Both are Filipino citizens, making them the first and second cases of Filipinos inside the Philippines.
March 7
The sixth case was confirmed on March 7.
The case is of the wife of the fifth case diagnosed on March 5.
The Department of Health confirmed that the fifth case was the first local transmission in the country.
Code Red Sub-Level 1 was also raised as a precautionary measure.
March 8
Four new cases were confirmed on March 8:
The seventh case is a Taiwanese national who got infected by another Taiwanese national that recently visited the Philippines.
His symptoms began appearing on March 3.
The eighth case is a Filipino citizen that recently visited Japan in the past two weeks.
His symptoms began appearing on March 5.
The ninth case is an American national with pre-existing hypertension that recently traveled to the US and South Korea.
His symptoms began appearing on March 1.
The tenth case is a Filipino citizen with no travel history outside of the country.
He had contact with confirmed COVID-19 cases but his exposure is still under investigation by the DOH.
March 9
Ten new cases were initially confirmed on March 9, totalling 20 cases.
On Monday evening, March 9, President Rodrigo Duterte has formally declared a state of public health emergency in the Philippines.
The president also suspended all classes, in public and private, in Metro Manila from March 10 to 14 and confirmed four more cases, totalling 23 cases.
March 10 – Eleven new cases were initially confirmed on March 10.
The DOH later corrected that two cases were repeat tests, totalling 33 cases.
March 11 – Sixteen new cases were confirmed on March 11, totalling 49 cases.
March 12
Three new cases were confirmed on March 12, totalling 52 cases.
President Rodrigo Duterte announces a partial lockdown on Metro Manila beginning at 12 midnight on March 15 that will cover 16 cities and one municipality.
Land, domestic air, and domestic sea travel to and from Metro Manila shall be suspended until April 14, 2020 (international departures will be permitted).
Entry travel restrictions shall be imposed upon those traveling from countries with localized COVID-19 transmissions, except for Filipino citizens (including their foreign spouse and children) or holders of Permanent Resident Visas and Diplomat Visas.
Mass transportation within Metro Manila shall continue to operate with social distancing guidelines.
March 13 – Twelve new cases were confirmed on March 13, totalling 64 cases.
March 14
Forty-seven new cases were confirmed on March 14, totalling 111 cases.
The province of Oriental Mindoro has been placed under a "voluntary community quarantine."
March 15
The National Capital Region and the municipality of Cainta in Rizal has been placed under "community quarantine" or a partial lockdown that will last until April 14.
Twenty-nine new cases have been confirmed on March 15, totalling 140 cases.
The PNP announced that an officer assigned to the CIDG showed symptoms of COVID-19 while having a diabetic condition.
He passed away on March 14 with the test results released by March 17.
March 16
Two new cases have been confirmed on March 16, totalling 142 cases.
President Duterte announces the placement of the entire island of Luzon including its associated islands on "enhanced community quarantine," in effect imposing a lockdown on the island.
March 17
The Department of Health confirmed that the occurrence of community based transmission of the coronavirus in the Philippines.
On March 17, forty-five new cases of COVID-19 was announced, bringing the total cases in the Philippines to 187.
A Diamond Princess repatriate who tested positive of the virus has completely recovered from the disease and was discharged within the same day.
This brings a total of 4 recoveries among infected patients in the Philippines.
On March 17, President Rodrigo Duterte have signed Proclamation No. 929 that placed the entire Philippines under state of calamity on account of COVID-19.
March 18
The Department of Health has confirmed six new cases on March 18, causing the number of the infected to rise to 193.
On March 18, the total confirmed cases of COVID-19 surpassed the 200-benchmark.
Eleven new cases were later confirmed, bringing the total cases in the Philippines to 202.
Additional three patient fatalities was confirmed that totaled to 17 deaths and 7 recoveries.
Cebu records its first case from a patient confined in a hospital in Mandaue.
March 19
Fifteen new cases were confirmed by the Department of Health on March 19, totalling 217 cases.
Department of Health Secretary Francisco Duque was placed under home quarantine after one of the department's senior official tested positive for the disease.
Department of Foreign Affairs Secretary Teodoro Locsin, Jr. announced the temporary suspension of visa issuance to all foreign individuals and cancellation of existing ones.
March 20
On March 20, President Rodrigo Duterte addressed the nation at the House of Representatives.
The president gave additional orders to the people and the government to alleviate the spread of COVID-19.
On March 20, thirteen additional cases of the disease was recorded, bringing the total cases of COVID-19 in the Philippine to 230.
Another fatality was documented, making the COVID-19 deaths in the country to 18.
Bacolod records first case from a patient confined in an unspecified private hospital.
March 21
On March 21, at 12PM, thirty-two new cases of COVID-19 was recorded, bringing the total confirmed patients in the Philippines to 262.
They also confirmed one fatality and recovery of five patients bringing the death toll to 19 and recovered patients to 13.
On March 21, at 4PM, forty-five additional new cases of COVID-19 was recorded, it surpassed the 300-mark, bringing the total cases in the Philippines to 307.
The first cases in Cagayan and Palawan were confirmed.
March 22
On March 22, at 12PM,seventy-three new COVID-19 cases have been recorded, bringing the total confirmed patients in the Philippines to 380.
They also confirmed six deaths and two recoveries bring the fatality record to 25, and recovered patients to 15.
According to Department of Health Undersecretary Maria Rosario Vergeire announced that Health Secretary Francisco Duque tested negative for COVID-19, though he will still continue his ongoing home quarantine.
March 23
The first case of COVID-19 in the Philippines was confirmed on January 30.
The diagnosed patient was a 38-year-old Chinese woman from Wuhan, the origin of the disease, who had arrived in Manila from Hong Kong on January 21.
She was admitted at the San Lazaro Hospital in Manila on January 25 after she sought a consultation due to a mild cough.
At the time of the confirmation announcement, the Chinese woman was already asymptomatic.The second case was confirmed on February 2, a 44-year-old Chinese male who was the companion of the first case.
His death on February 1 was the first recorded outside China.
He suffered from coinfection with influenza and Streptococcus pneumoniae.On February 5, the DOH confirmed a third case in a 60-year-old Chinese woman who flew into Cebu City from Hong Kong on January 20 before she traveled to Bohol where she consulted a doctor at a private hospital on January 22, due to fever and rhinitis.
Samples taken from the patient on January 24 returned a negative result, but the DOH was notified on February 3 that samples taken from the patient on January 23 tested positive for the virus.
The patient upon recovery on January 31 was allowed to go home to China.After a month without new cases, on March 6, the DOH announced two cases consisting of two Filipinos.
One is a 48-year-old man with a travel history to Japan, returning on February 25 and reported symptoms on March 3.
The other is a 60-year-old man with a history of hypertension and diabetes who experienced symptoms on February 25 and was admitted to a hospital on March 1 when he experienced pneumonia.
He had last visited a Muslim prayer hall in San Juan.
The DOH confirmed that the fifth case had no travel history outside the Philippines and is, therefore, the first case of local transmission.
A sixth case was later confirmed, that of a 59-year-old woman who is the wife of the fifth case.
The Department of Health confirmed that the fourth case is a lawyer who works for the multinational firm Deloitte while the fifth case is a resident of Cainta.
On March 8, it was confirmed that an American, Taiwanese and two Filipinos were being treated for the virus.
On March 9, the DOH announced 10 more cases of the virus with unnamed patients being isolated at various hospitals.
That same day, President Duterte announced four more cases from San Juan, Quezon City and Santa Maria, Bulacan.
The last-mentioned case was eventually clarified to be from San Jose del Monte, still in the same province.On March 16, Senate Majority Leader Juan Miguel Zubiri confirmed that he tested positive for COVID-19.
Claiming he was asymptomatic, Zubiri interacted with a resource person at the Senate of the Philippines who had earlier tested positive.On March 17, actor Christopher de Leon announced that he had contracted the virus.
On the same day, Zubiri was told that he will have to be retested to ensure that his initial result was not a false positive.Two days later, Joey Bautista, the lead singer and vocalist of 90s rock band Mulatto, died of severe pneumonia, a day before he was confirmed to be COVID-19 positive.
On the other hand, self-made billionaire Necesito Sytengco, who is ranked by Forbes as 39th richest man in the Philippines, also died on March 19.
Several netizens speculated that Sytengco was one of the fatalities of COVID-19 after matching his information from DOH's information releases.
However, his family nor the SBS Philippines Corporation confirmed these reports.
Professor Aileen Baviera, a former dean of the University of the Philippines Asian Center and a leading expert on China, died on March 21 at San Lazaro Hospital in Manila due to severe pneumonia caused by COVID-19.
She died before seeing the test result that should have confirmed if COVID-19 was the main cause of her death.Here is the list of the general information about the 380 confirmed cases in the Philippines:
The first three confirmed cases in the Philippines involved foreigners.
The first confirmed case of a Filipino national outside the Philippines was announced by the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) on February 5, 2020—that of a crew member of the Diamond Princess cruise ship quarantined off the coast of Yokohama, Japan.On February 8, a Filipino in the UAE was diagonsed to have the coronavirus.On February 25, the DFA announced that a Filipino national living in Singapore is being treated at the National Centre for Infectious Diseases after being confirmed positive.
It was previously reported that the person is a permanent resident of Singapore.
On February 29, the second case involving a Filipino was diagnosed positive and is at the Ng Teng Fong General Hospital (NTFGH).
On March 2, it was reported that another Filipino living in Singapore as a domestic helper was diagnosed with the coronavirus and is also treated at NTFGH.
On March 4, Singapore announced that the first Filipino case has recovered from the virus.On March 4, it was announced that a Filipino working in Hong Kong as an overseas worker tested positive for the virus and was immediately placed in quarantine.
The Philippine consulate in Hong Kong has reported that two of the Filipinos working in HK who were diagnosed positive were not showing the symptoms with one of them expected to be discharged soon.On March 9, two Filipinos in Lebanon were tested positive for the virus before they were placed under quarantine in Beirut.On March 10, a Filipina from Italy was confirmed to have contracted the virus in Switzerland.On March 11, three Filipinos in Singapore were tested positive with the virus.
All three had been to the Philippines recently with one of them visiting a relative with pneumonia.
The DOH also confirmed that six Filipinos aboard the Grand Princess cruise ship, which docked in Oakland, California, for quarantine, have contracted the virus.
The DFA is currently awaiting the approval of the U.S. Department of State for the repatriation of the affected Filipino nationals.On March 13, a Filipino working in New York as a diplomat with the Philippines' UN mission was confirmed to be positive for the virus, which led to the entire mission at Philippine Center being disinfected and closed for the day.On March 14, two Filipinos working in Singapore were confirmed to have the virus and are being isolated and treated.On March 15, it was reported that 77 Filipinos in Japan have recovered from the virus while three are still in hospital.
Two Filipinos in Singapore have recovered.
Four in the UAE are in isolation.
It was reported in France that two Filipinos were infected, but one of them has recovered.On March 18, a Filipino woman in Athens was reported to have tested positive for the virus.
She had been experiencing mild symptoms and was placed under home quarantine.On March 19, a Fiipino woman working in Kuwait as a domestic worker has been confirmed positive for the virus, due to being in close contact with someone who traveled to the UK.
There have been 10 confirmed cases of foreign nationals who went to the Philippines as of March 22.
The DOH uses the designation "patients under investigation" (PUIs) and "patients under monitoring" (PUMs) to manage suspected and confirmed cases.
PUIs involved individuals who had a travel history to Wuhan but by February 3, the DOH has expanded the scope of PUIs to include individuals who had a travel history to any part of China.As of March 14, there are 912 total PUIs; 694 of which had been discharged or refused admission (but are still "under monitoring"), 209 are currently admitted at a health facility (including 56 confirmed cases), and eight had died (only one of which is an unconfirmed case).
The sole PUI mortality not confirmed resulting from the coronavirus is that of a 29-year-old Chinese national from Yunnan confined at a Manila hospital who died from pneumonia and also tested positive for HIV.
The Philippine Council on Health Research and Development of the Department of Science and Technology (PCHRD-DOST) on February 7 plans to distribute an undisclosed "functional food" to help individuals with COVID-19 infection to combat the disease within a month.
A "functional food" is described by the PCHRD-DOST as similar to how the herb locally known as tawa-tawa is used as a remedy against dengue.
The undisclosed functional food is already used for other diseases and is not a drug that requires registration with the FDA.The PCHRD-DOST as part of the government's interagency committee proposed funding for screening for antibodies against COVID-19 in blood specimens collected from COVID-19 PUIs in the Philippines to help contribute to international efforts to understand the disease.
However, there is no government-led research in the Philippines to develop a COVID-19 vaccine.The DOH has issued a reminder, that Level 2 and 3 hospitals cannot deny admittance of people suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 infection and refusal of admission is a "violation of the signed Performance Commitment and shall be dealt with by the PhilHealth accordingly".
The department said that Level 2 and 3 hospitals can accommodate individuals with mild COVID-19 symptoms while individuals in a serious or critical condition may be transferred to one of the DOH's three referral hospitals; the RITM, Lung Center of the Philippines in Quezon City and the San Lazaro Hospital.
On March 20, the DOH designated the Lung Center of the Philippines and the Dr. Jose N. Rodriguez Memorial Hospital in Caloocan to cater exclusively to confirmed cases of COVID-19, in order to sustain manpower, medical equipment, and facilities amid the exponential rise of cases.Russian Ambassador to the Philippines Igor Khovaev announced that the Russian government is offering to donate to Filipino officials a Russian-developed over-the-counter drug called "Cicloferon" claimed to have cured the symptoms of COVID-19 on Russian patients.
The FDA and DOH have classified the said drug as treatment rather than cure.
Prior to January 30, there were no medical facilities in the country that can confirm cases of the virus.
Prior to that date, the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) in Muntinlupa conducted preliminary tests on suspected cases to determine if they are infected with a coronavirus but could not detect the new strain on patients.
Samples from suspected cases with confirmed coronavirus infection had to be sent abroad to the Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory in Melbourne, Australia, for confirmatory testing specifically for SARS-CoV-2 strain.In response to the pandemic following a cleared suspected case, the RITM began the process of acquiring primers and reagents to conduct confirmatory tests in the country.
On January 29, it was announced that the RITM has acquired confirmatory kits to be able to test cases in the country.
A laboratory for the confirmatory test became operational on January 30.The RITM is also training personnel of four sub-national reference labs of the DOH to help them develop capability to test samples from "patients under investigation" (PUIs).
These laboratories are at the San Lazaro Hospital in Manila, the Baguio General Hospital in Baguio, the Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center in Cebu City, and the Southern Philippines Medical Center in Davao City.
The DOH has also allowed private health facilities to seek testing accreditation.
By March 20, the four health facilities has started testing.
Likewise, the Western Visayas Medical Center in Iloilo City was given accreditation by the DOH to conduct COVID-19 tests on March 18, 2020.
A testing kit for the virus was announced on February 4 to have been developed by the National Institutes of Health at the University of the Philippines Manila.
The kit was developed two weeks prior to the announcement and was subject to evaluation by the DOH.
The equipment is a polymerase chain reaction testing kit and is to be produced by Manila HealthTek.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) gave the product a certificate of exemption on March 9 allowing it to be used under field validation until the testing kit receives validation from the World Health Organization.
The testing kit is reportedly six times cheaper than its foreign counterparts.The RITM on February 26, reportedly is purchasing 19,000 testing kits from a source abroad.
The number of testing kits by March 9 is around 2,000 from a high of 4,500 at an unspecified date.
The government experienced a shortage of testing kits and has prioritized individuals exhibiting symptoms for testing.
By March 9, 2020, a total of 2,000 tests has been conducted at a rate of 200 to 250 people accommodated by tests per day.
Ruffy Biazon, a member of the House of Representatives from Muntinlupa, called on the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP) on January 22 to suspend flights from Wuhan to the Philippines.
Royal Air Charter Service operates direct flights from Wuhan to Kalibo.
By then, Philippine travel visas under the "visa-upon-arrival" (VUA) program were denied to tourists from Wuhan.
On January 24, the Philippine government deported 135 individuals from Wuhan who arrived in the country through the Kalibo International Airport.
There were calls for a wider temporary ban on people entering the country from anywhere in China.
Such move was supported by Senators Ralph Recto, Bong Go, Risa Hontiveros, and Francis Pangilinan.
The DOH and the Office of the President find no urgent need for such measure.On January 31, a travel ban on all Chinese nationals from Hubei and other affected areas in China was imposed.
The VUA program for Chinese tourists and businessmen was also suspended.
On February 2, a ban was introduced on all foreign travellers who visited China, Hong Kong, and Macau in the past 14 days; Philippine citizens and holders of permanent resident visas were allowed in the country but subjected to a mandatory 14-day quarantine.
The Philippine government also ordered a ban on travel to China, Hong Kong, and Macau until further notice.
On February 10, the ban was further extended to include Taiwan but was lifted on February 15.
On February 14, the DOH announced that a risk assessment carried out to determine if Singapore would be placed under a travel ban.
Philippine Foreign Secretary Teodoro Locsin Jr. announced that he would not fully support any official travel bans to Singapore.
On February 26, travel to South Korea was banned, except for permanent residents, Filipino leaving for study, and Overseas Filipino Workers returning for work.The Philippine Ports Authority had barred disembarkation by crew or passengers from vessels which have recently visited China, and suspended the visitation privileges of relatives of Filipino seafarers and boarding privileges of non-government organizations providing emotional and spiritual support to seafarers.On March 19, Secretary Locsin announced that the Philippine government would deny the entry of all foreign nationals, effective that day "until further notice".
All Philippine embassies and consulates would suspend the issuing of its visas to all foreign nationals and invalidate all existing ones.
However, Locsin clarified that visas that had already been issued to families of Filipino nationals would still remain valid.
Following the confirmation of the first localized transmission on March 7, the DOH raised its alert to Code Red Sub-Level 1.
Health Secretary Francisco Duque and Senator Bong Go, chair of the Senate Committee on Health and Demography, recommended to President Duterte to declare a public health emergency in the country, which would authorize local government units to employ their local disaster risk reduction management funds.
President Duterte issued Proclamation No. 922 on March 9, formally declaring a public health emergency.The Department of Trade and Industry on March 9 issued a directive ordering retailers should only allow the sale of two bottles of each type of disinfectant per person as a measure against hoarding.
In line with the public health emergency declaration, the department imposed a 60-day price freeze on basic commodities.On March 16, the president signed Proclamation No. 929 declaring a state of calamity throughout the country for a period of six months, bringing into effect the following:
price control of basic needs and commodities,
granting of interest-free loans,
distribution of calamity funds,
authorization of importation and receipt of donations, and
hazard allowance for public health workers and government personnel in the fields of science and technology.The Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) announced that it would provide ₱30-billion (US$581-million) worth of advance payment to its accredited health facilities in order for health care providers to obtain the liquid capital required to efficiently respond to the crisis.
PhilHealth also subsided some of its policies on its members; it waived the 45-day coverage and single period of confinement policies, while extending payment deadlines until the end of April and the failing period of claims from 60 days to at least 120 days.
In addition, PhilHealth announced that PUIs quarantined in its accredited facilities are entitled to a ₱14,000 ($270) health package, while those who tested positive for COVID-19 are entitled to a ₱32,000 ($580) beneficiary package.
Given the rapidly increasing number of cases in the National Capital Region, Albay 2nd district representative Joey Salceda proposed a week-long lockdown of the region in order to prevent the disease from spreading nationwide.
Salceda specifically proposed the closure of the Philippine expressway network and public transportation accessing the region, in addition to the suspension of classes and work.
President Duterte initially rejected the proposal claiming it would "hamper the flow of basic commodities".
Secretary Duque, however, raised the possibility of a lockdown on certain cities or towns if cases of community-based transmissions are reported, but not an entire region.
On March 12, President Duterte announced a partial lockdown covering Metro Manila, that begun on March 15 and will last until April 14.
Under the partial lockdown:
The region is closed to land, air, and sea travel.
However, mass transportation within Metro Manila such as the Manila LRT and MRT continues to operate under proper social distancing guidelines.
Suspension of classes at all levels in Metro Manila is extended until April 14.
Spontaneous and planned mass gatherings are banned.
Work in the Executive department is suspended under the lockdown period.
The Department of Labor and Employment encourages employers in the private sector to arrange "flexible work arrangements".In addition, President Duterte advised local government units outside of the National Capital Region to implement a community quarantine in cases where, in a given level of local government, at least two COVID-19 cases are confirmed within a lower level of its jurisdiction; for example, a province-wide quarantine should be implemented if there are at least two COVID-19 cases confirmed within different cities or municipalities in the same province, while a city/municipality-wide quarantine should be implemented if there are at least two COVID-19 cases confirmed within different barangays in the same city or municipality.
Local government units were also authorized to utilize their quick response funds upon declaration of a state of emergency.Cainta also initiated a partial lockdown on March 15, after three cases of COVID-19 were confirmed in the municipality.
Bohol Governor Arthur C. Yap announced that the province would be placed under community quarantine from March 16 to 20 and will prohibit tourists from entering during the quarantine period.
On March 16, President Duterte imposed an "enhanced" community quarantine covering the entire Luzon, which entails the following measures:
the suspension of mass public transportation;
restricted land, air, and sea travel, in which Overseas Filipinos and foreign nationals are given a 72-hour window (until March 20) to depart the Philippines from any port of entry in Luzon;
the imposition of strict home quarantine among all households;
the organization of telecommuting arrangements for the executive government, with the exception of the Philippine National Police, Armed Forces of the Philippines, and health and emergency frontline services;
and the closure of all private establishments, except for those providing essential goods and services and business process outsourcing establishments.The Luzon measures also cover the Mimaropa region which includes the outlying islands of Palawan, Marinduque, Mindoro, and Romblon.On March 17, Cabinet Secretary Karlo Nograles announced that the Office of the President, through the Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases, had rescinded the 72-hour window for which Overseas Filipinos and foreign nationals were allowed to depart the country from Luzon.
As such, outbound passengers are permitted to depart the Philippines at any time during the period of the "enhanced" community quarantine, but Filipino residents are still prohibited from doing so.Vice President Leni Robredo's office raised ₱17.3 million ($261,360) to purchase around 36,000 sets of personal protective equipment (PPE) and donate it to about 2,400 frontline health professionals across the country.
The first batch consisted of 7,350 PPEs that were donated to 490 professionals in eight hospitals in Manila and Quezon City with COVID-19 cases.
Robredo said that her office is planning to donate around 29,000 more PPEs to different hospitals across the country.
Local governments also took preventive measures against the pandemic.
The local government of Sagada closed all government-managed tourist destinations in the municipality.
The local government of Samal has also barred all foreigners coming from countries affected by the coronavirus pandemic as well as all individuals suspected to have been infected wit the virus, and those who were previously quarantined from entering the island city.
Mayor Kit Nieto of Cainta, where the fifth case resided, ordered the immediate provision of face masks and disinfectants in areas near the residence of the patient.
The patient's family, as well as his neighbors, were placed under quarantine.
Nieto suspended classes in Cainta from March 7 to 10.
On March 20, 2020, the local government of La Trinidad, Benguet began disinfection in the area, including the Halsema Highway.
Amid the COVID-19 outbreak, the provincial government of Bulacan suspended classes on Tuesday, March 10, 2020 as precaution.
Class suspensions were eventually extended up to Saturday, March 14.
On March 19, the provincial government carried out the enhanced community quarantine measures, effectively placing the entire province under a lockdown.
Classes were suspended until April 14; public transportation systems were put on hold, with movement of the populace limited to the accessibility of essential needs including basic goods and healthcare services; vital establishments were allowed to remain open; and a curfew from 8:00 in the evening to 5:00 in the morning was set up.
Barangays in several municipalities (such as Bocaue) had issued passes that permit only one member of a family to leave their house for acquiring basic provisions.
On March 13, 2020, the mayors of Cebu City, Mandaue, and Lapu-Lapu suspended classes in all levels for both private and public schools as a preventive measure against the spread of the virus.
The suspension of classes in Cebu City and Lapu-Lapu were scheduled until March 28.
Schools, however, were required to implement distance education measures.On March 15, Cebu Governor Gwendolyn Garcia announced the imposition of a province-wide curfew from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m. the following day.
Garcia also announced that the Mactan–Cebu International Airport and the Port of Cebu would suspend all arrivals and departures of domestic passenger travel, effective March 17.
She added that residents of Cebu would still be allowed to depart the island province, but they would only be allowed to re-enter after 30 days.
That same day, Cebu City Mayor Edgardo Labella placed the city under a "general community quarantine" from March 16 to April 14; under the quarantine, health checkpoints would be established in the city's 11 entry points, the suspension of classes in the city was extended until April 14, and a four-day workweek was scheduled for city government workers from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.On March 16, following the imposition of a "general community quarantine" in Cebu City, Mayor Labella issued an executive order prohibiting the sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic beverages in all public places.On March 19, Mayor Labella ordered the temporary closure of all commercial establishments in the city, including all malls and the Cebu City Sports Complex but excluding establishments providing essential goods and services, until the end of the "general community quarantine".
On March 13, 2020, Ilocos Norte Governor Matthew Manotoc issued Executive Order No. 59-20 which suspended classes in private and public institutions indefinitely and mandated the duties of school officials/administrators and parents/guardians, which included the adoption of and participation in alternative measures for course completion.
On March 14, 2020, he signed Executive Order No. 60-20 which placed the province under community quarantine.
The order activated Task Force Salun-at, which was previously institutionalized under Executive Order No. 51-20.
Under the provisions of Executive Order No. 60-20, Task Force Salun-at was given authority over the province to deny entry to certain individuals based on criteria specified in the order, and enforce checking of individuals seeking entry and required clearance, endorsement, quarantine, and monitoring.
The executive order also included provisions for the:
regulation of ports and borders;
the preparation of health information forms,
personal and public preventive measures,
identification of quarantine areas,
prohibition of hoarding, reselling, and price spikes, and
prohibition of the spreading of fake news.
In Ilocos Sur, Governor Ryan Luis V. Singson issued Executive Order No. 12 and Executive Order No. 13, on March 12 and 13, 2020, respectively.
The executive orders mandated the suspension of classes in all levels from March 13 to April 12, 2020, as well as the suspension of other school activities that involve the gathering of crowds, at both public and private schools in the province.
On March 15, the province was placed under community quarantine through Executive Order No. 14 which restricted the movement of people to and from Ilocos Sur, mandated the establishment of checkpoints and conditions for transportation and travel, prohibited social gatherings, encouraged flexible/alternative work arrangements or suspension of work, suspended tourism, prohibited hoarding, delineated rules for business establishments, and imposed curfew.
The government began the repatriation of Filipino nationals in China on January 18.
Flights were organised to repatriate Filipinos in the Hubei.
Upon arrival in the Philippines, individuals underwent mandatory quarantine for 14 days.The Mega Drug Abuse Treatment and Rehabilitation Center at Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija and Caballo Island in Manila Bay are being considered as possible quarantine sites for repatriated Filipinos.
President Rodrigo Duterte said that the government may seize private property for conversion to quarantine sites.
It was later decided that the Athlete's Village at the New Clark City Sports Hub which also has a clinic run by the Philippine General Hospital will be used as a quarantine site for repatriated Filipinos.
New Clark City was locked down on February 6 in preparation for the arrival of the repatriated.
The first batch of repatriated Filipinos arrived at the Clark Air Base via a Royal Air chartered flight on February 9.
From the air base, designated buses transported them to the quarantine site at the New Clark City in Capas, Tarlac.All 30 repatriated Overseas Filipino Workers in New Clark City received a clean bill of health and released from quarantine on February 22 along with the ten-member joint DFA-DOH Health Emergency Response Team, six flight crew members, and three ground operators which assisted in the repatriation process.
During the quarantine period, none of the individuals displayed any symptoms with one woman giving birth.There are around 150 Filipinos who live in Wuhan alone, about 40 to 50 of whom have asked to be repatriated.
On March 7, the Philippine government announced that an airlift operation will be launched to bring home 167 Filipinos working in Macau.
The Philippine government announced on February 17 that they have began the process of repatriating on board the Diamond Princess which was quarantined off the coast of Yokohama due to confirmed COVID-19 infection.
445 Filipinos (440 being crew members and 5 being passengers) were quarantined in New Clark City.
The repatriates arrived in the Philippines via two separate flights on February 25 and 26.After completing a 14-day quarantine period, repatriated seafarers will be given aid by the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA).
Each will receive ₱10,000 from the OWWA and ₱20,000 livelihood grant will be made available to Filipino seafarers who opted to stay permanently in the Philippines.Thirteen repatriates exhibited symptoms after arrival but all tested negative for the COVID-19.On March 15, the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) repatriated a total of 444 Filipinos (including 438 crew members and 6 passengers) from the cruise ship Grand Princess docked in the Port of Oakland in California.
Repatriates arrived on March 16 at Clark International Airport and were transported to New Clark City for quarantine.
The Presidential Security Group would start implementing a "no-touch" policy during meetings by President Duterte with politicians, reporters and visitors.Several government officials, including President Duterte, opted to undergo a self-quarantine after interacting with individuals confirmed to have COVID-19.
This includes almost half of all members of the Senate of the Philippines, several members of the Cabinet, Manila Mayor Isko Moreno, and Davao City Mayor Sara Duterte.
Senate Majority Leader Juan Miguel Zubiri tested positive for the virus.
Several government facilities, including the offices of the Asian Development Bank, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Department of Finance, and the Government Service Insurance System (which also hosts the Senate), as well as Malacañang Palace, temporarily closed for disinfection following exposure from those officials who have interacted with a COVID-19 patient.
Local airlines AirAsia, Philippine Airlines and Cebu Pacific suspended flights between China and its territories (Macau and Hong Kong) and the Philippines from February 2.The Wack Wack Golf and Country Club in Mandaluyong temporarily closed on March 11 after one of its guests, a Singaporean permanent resident, was confirmed to have contracted COVID-19.Mall operators Ayala Malls and SM Supermalls have enforced stricter measures at its malls to safeguard larger volumes of customers and employees.
These include temperature checks at mall entrances, an increase in the availability of alcohol and hand sanitizer dispensers, and the disinfection of restrooms occurring at smaller time intervals.
In accordance with government directives to observe social distancing measures, some mall operators including Megaworld Lifestyle Malls have implemented a "single seat gap" policy in cinemas, in which moviegoers are required to sit one seat apart from each other.
Following the MMDA's imposition of an area-wide curfew during the Metro Manila lockdown, mall operators Ayala Malls, SM Supermalls, Robinsons Malls, and Vista Malls initially announced that it would shorten the operating hours of its malls in the area, from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m., in response.
However, Metro Manila city governments later passed ordinances mandating the temporary closure of malls with the exception of essential services from March 16 "until further notice", in accordance with the joint resolution passed by the Metro Manila Council regarding the lockdown.The country's largest telecommunications services, Globe Telecom and Smart Communications, both announced that they would offer its subscribers free services during the pandemic; Globe would offer free unlimited Internet connection in some hospitals in Metro Manila from March 13 to April 15, while Smart would offer free access to government websites issuing updates and advisories, as well as toll-free access to emergency hotlines.San Miguel Corporation, the largest corporation in the Philippines in terms of revenue, announced that its food, fuel, and power generation facilities would continue operation to provide essential services, amid the "enhanced" community quarantine in Luzon.
President Ramon S. Ang gave assurances of the company's capability to produce sufficient food supplies and its commitment to continue paying its employees.The Ayala Corporation, the country's largest corporation in terms of assets, announced a ₱2.4-billion (US$46.4 million) relief package for employees of its subsidiaries; the package comprises salary continuance, rent condonation for affected tenants of the Ayala Malls, leave conversions, loan deferments, and other financial assistance measures.Following the declaration of an "enhanced" community quarantine on Luzon, numerous tertiary and quaternary sector companies had decided to implement a 30 to 90-day grace period of payment deadlines for its customers.
Such companies include Banco de Oro, Bank of the Philippine Islands, Cignal TV, EastWest Bank, Globe Telecom, Manila Water, Manulife, Maynilad Water Services, Meralco, PLDT, Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation, Smart Communications, Security Bank, Sky Cable, Sun Cellular, Sun Life Financial, and the Union Bank of the Philippines.The Alliance Global Group pledged to donate 1,000,000 litres (260,000 US gal) of disinfectant solutions, denatured from 850,000 litres (220,000 US gal) of 96% ethyl alcohol, to local health facilities and other frontline institutions through the DOH.
The Roman Catholic Church in the Philippines has issued preventive guidelines against the pandemic through the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines (CBCP).
In January 2020, the CBCP has issued a liturgical guideline which urges mass attendees to "practice ordinarily" the receiving of communion by hand, and avoid holding hands while praying "Our Father" during Mass.
As a spiritual measure against the spread of the disease, the CBCP has also composed a oratio imperata (obligatory prayer) which is to be recited in mass.
In February 2020, the CBCP issued a second liturgical guideline in anticipation of the Lenten season.
The bishops suggested that during Ash Wednesday, ashes will be sprinkled on the faithfuls' head instead of the customary marking of the forehead with a cross to minimize body contact.
The CBCP also urged people to refrain from kissing or touching the cross for veneration during Good Friday, particularly the celebration of the Passion of Jesus.
They suggested genuflection or bowing as an alternative to the practice.On March 9, 2020, Manila Apostolic Administrator, Broderick Pabillo, issued a pastoral letter advising practitioners and clergy members experiencing flu-like symptoms to refrain from attending Mass or visiting churches, recommending them to watch Masses through television or online streaming instead.
Pabillo also ordered the provision of disinfectants in churches and chapels and the barricading of statues and sacred images to prevent people from holding or kissing them.
The Archdiocese of Manila which covers churches in the cities of Manila, Makati, San Juan, Mandaluyong, and Pasay (except Villamor Air Base and Newport City areas) suspended all public religious activities including Masses from March 14 to 20, 2020.
The Archdiocese of Cebu followed suit by suspending all public masses and other religious gatherings starting March 18, 2020 until further notice.
Cebu Archbishop Jose Palma has directed the live streaming of Eucharistic celebrations and other religious events through social media as well as broadcasting of Holy Masses on television and radio.The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints directed missionaries assigned in the Philippines who are not native to the country to move out for temporary reassignment to another country.
They were ordered to self-quarantine in their new homes for 14 days.The Islamic community in the Philippines has also adopted measures against COVID-19.
The Regional Darul Ifta' of Bangsamoro has suspended all congregational prayers in the Bangsamoro region from March 19 to April 10, 2020.
The government of China and the United States has pledged support to the Philippine government response against COVID-19.
China announced that it would be donating medical supplies including 100,000 testing kits, 100,000 surgical masks, 10,000 N95 masks, and 10,000 sets of personal protective equipment.
The United States through USAID also pledged $2.7 million worth of aid to help the Philippines develop adequate testing capabilities, and ensure the availability of medical supplies through USAID's "on-the-ground partners".
On March 9, 2020, the Philippine Stock Exchange (PSE) index lost 457.77 points or 6.76%, its steepest decline since the financial crisis of 2007–08.
The following day, shares plunged by 6.23% to ₱5,957.35, settling below the 6,000 level benchmark and entering bear market territory.
The mining and oil industries were the most affected with a 9.05% drop, followed by holding companies with 6.93% drop.
The PSE's circuit breaker mechanism was invoked for the second time since the measure's introduction in 2008 halting trade for 15 minutes.The retail industry in the Philippines was affected by the pandemic.
According to the Philippine Retailers Association, the "total retail environment" saw a decline of 30% to 50%.
SM Investments, the country's largest retailer, saw a decline of 10% to 20% in domestic sales.The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines estimates that around 7,000 people may lose jobs within the first half of 2020 due to the pandemic.
This followed Philippine Airlines' decision to lay off 300 of its workers due to losses caused by the pandemic.
Philippines AirAsia also dropped its plan to debut in the Philippine Stock Exchange within 2020 and decided to focus on expanding its domestic operations after government ban on China and South Korea which threatened 30% of its revenue.
Employees of Cebu Pacific, the country's largest airline, compromised on a pay cut amounting to 10% in order to avoid layoffs.The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) revised its economic growth outlook for the Philippines in 2020 from a 6.5% to 7.5% gross domestic product (GDP) growth registered in late 2019, to a 5.5% to 6.5% GDP growth, following the pandemic.
The NEDA cited the decline in service exports, especially tourism.
Moody's Analytics also reduced its GDP growth outlook for the country, from 5.9% in 2019 to 4.9% following the pandemic.Filing of income tax returns was extended to May 15 from April 15 by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.
The DOH issued an advisory for the cancellation of large public events and mass gatherings, such as concerts, until further notice in an effort to minimize the risk of spreading the disease.
This prompted several local and international artists to either cancel or postpone their scheduled concerts, including 98 Degrees, Ogie Alcasid and Ian Veneracion, Green Day, Hyukoh, Jimmy Eat World, Khalid, Avril Lavigne, Alanis Morissette, One Ok Rock, the fan meet of the Running Man cast, Slipknot, Gary Valenciano, and the Wanderland Music and Arts Festival.Local television networks has temporarily stopped admitting live audience for their television shows, including variety shows Eat Bulaga!
on GMA Network as well as It's Showtime and ASAP on ABS-CBN.
On March 13, both ABS-CBN and GMA announced that they would suspend productions on their drama shows as well as other entertainment programs by March 15.
ABS-CBN introduced a temporary lineup of programs for its special primetime programming featuring reruns of the network's old drama shows.On March 17, MediaQuest-run networks Radyo5 92.3 News FM, One News, and One PH suspended its regular programming as an effect of the Luzon-wide "enhanced community quarantine".
On the following day (March 18), CNN Philippines was forced to go off air after an employee working at the Worldwide Corporate Center, where the network's headquarters is situated, was confirmed to be positive with COVID-19.
CNN Philippines continued its coverage via its online platforms, and it is slated to return on air on March 23.
ABS-CBN News scaled down its operations due to the quarantine by suspending its morning show Umagang Kay Ganda as well as selected bulletins in the ABS-CBN News Channel (both were temporarily replaced by simulcast from DZMM TeleRadyo).
GMA News followed suit by temporarily closing down GMA News TV (GNTV) from March 19 and 20.
Dobol B sa News TV's Melo del Prado sa Super Radyo DZBB aired temporarily on GMA Network on these days alongside Unang Hirit.
GNTV is scheduled to return on-air on March 21, with the expanded edition of Dobol B sa News TV (along with DZBB's simulcast of 24 Oras) airing into the primetime as its sole program, and the original six-hour morning block will be airing on GMA Network from March 23.
Shortage of medical masks was reported in various parts of the country due to concerns over the pandemic.
RITM director Celia Carlos urged the public against hoarding masks to ensure ample supply for medical workers directly dealing with patients suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19 infection.
The Department of Trade and Industry in cooperation with the Philippine National Police are acting against reports of traders hoarding face masks and selling said item at an overpriced rate.
The DTI has also directed its Philippine International Trading Corp.
to import 5 million masks from overseas.
Medtecs International Corp.
Ltd., the sole manufacturer of medical mask in the country, has committed to provide supply to the government through the DTI.
Several ongoing sports leagues in the Philippines, such as the ASEAN Basketball League, Maharlika Pilipinas Basketball League, National Collegiate Athletic Association, Philippine Basketball Association, Philippines Football League, Philippine Super Liga, and the University Athletic Association of the Philippines, were suspended.
Upcoming sporting competitions hosted by the country, specifically the 2020 ASEAN Para Games, the 2020 Palarong Pambansa in Marikina, and the Philippine National Games, were postponed.Regional qualification games involving Philippine national teams were likewise postponed; the 2021 FIBA Asia Cup qualification home match of the Philippine men's national basketball team against Thailand scheduled for February 20 at the Smart Araneta Coliseum was rescheduled, while FIFA and the Asian Football Confederation suspended the Philippine national football team's three remaining matches in the second round of qualification for the 2022 FIFA World Cup.Some games, however, pushed through but were played behind closed doors to prevent the spread of the virus amongst the audience.
Prior to the suspension of the Philippine Super Liga, three matches in the PSL Grand Prix Conference on March 10 were played at an empty Filoil Flying V Centre.
On March 11, local football team Ceres–Negros F.C. played their 2020 AFC Cup home match against Bali United F.C. behind closed doors at the Rizal Memorial Stadium.Cancelled sports leagues and tournaments in the Philippines due to COVID-19 pandemic:
ASEAN Para Games (March 20–28) – a multi-sport for differently-abled ASEAN athletes.
This would be the second postponement of the games; initially postponed to March due to non-COVID-19 related concerns.
Palarong Pambansa (May 1–9) – a national multi-sport event; postponed.
Philippines Football League (opening on March 21) – tentatively delayed starting date to April 18.
PBA Philippine Cup (opening on March 8) – Had already progressed but suspended on March 10.
Cordillera Administrative Region Athletic Association (CARAA) Meet (February 16–21) – a regional multi-sport event.
Initially postponed as a precautionary measure on February 4; later cancelled on March 9.
The NEDA during a House of Representative committee hearing said that the coronavirus pandemic would incur a ₱22.7 billion monthly loss of tourism revenue and the impact of the pandemic could last around five to six months based from past experiences from the SARS, H1N1, and the MERS outbreaks.
Over 5,200 flights covering a period of two months which was to be serviced by member airlines of the Air-Carriers Association of the Philippines was cancelled.The National Museum of the Philippines temporarily closed their complex in Manila and all branch museums throughout the country.
On March 13, the National Parks Development Committee also closed Rizal Park and Paco Park until further notice while the Intramuros Administration closed several sites in Intramuros, including Fort Santiago, Museo de Intramuros and Casa Manila.The following are canceled and postponed festivals due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic:
Ubaya Festival of Besao, Mountain Province (February 29 – March 4)
the first nationwide Philippine Shopping Festival(March 1–31) – not cancelled but postponed
Seslong Festival of T'Boli, South Cotabato (March 5–16)
Ayowweng di Lambak Festival of the Tadian, Mountain Province (March 6–8)
Wanderland Music and Arts Festival of Muntinlupa (March 7–8) – not canceled but postponed
Art in the Park of Salcedo Park, Makati (March 15) – not canceled but postponed
Panagbenga Festival of Baguio (starting March 21) – initially postponed as a precautionary measure on January 31; later cancelled on March 9.
The annual Tobacco Festival of Candon (usually running from March 18–28) including the annual Begnas Festival in Galimuyod, Ilocos Sur on March 9–11, 2020; and the Cacao Festival of Salcedo, Ilocos Sur on March 19–21, 2020.
Kaamulan Festival of Bukidnon (March 23 – April 23)
Magayon Festival of Albay (April)
Paynauen Duyan Festival of Iba, Zambales (Apri 21–26)
Tinelas Festival of Liliw (April 28 – May 3)
Dinamulag Festival of Zambales (April 29 – May 2)
Several misinformation has spread through social media in the Philippines regarding the nature of the coronavirus pandemic.
Among these hoaxes include:
SARS-CoV-2 being a type of rabies along with advice to not eat bats.
The virus is in the coronavirus family and is unrelated to rabies.
Boiled ginger as a cure for COVID-19.
There is no concrete scientific proof for this claim.
Mark Pasayan, a doctor from the Philippine Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases says that while cold weather may susceptible to COVID-19 infection, intake of hot or cold food has no correlation to prevention and treatment of the disease.
The government supposedly imposing 14-day quarantine for travellers coming from 20 countries.
An infographic supporting the claim was circulated purportedly from the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG).
On February 7, the DILG denied the claim.
At that time the quarantine measure is only being imposed from travellers from three territories: Mainland China, Macau, and Hong Kong.
Viral posts with various claims such as avoidance of eating ice cream and cold food, and encouraging exposure to sunlight as a means of prevention against COVID-19 purportedly from UNICEF.
UNICEF Philippines has issued a statement disassociating itself from the posts peddling false and misleading information.
The Department of Health supposedly issuing an advisory on the proliferation of fake cigarettes which is claimed to be a method of transmission of COVID-19.
The government agency did not issue such advisory.
A widely circulated graphic on social media claimed that gargling warm water with salt would "eliminate the virus."
DOH Undersecretary Eric Domingo said that while the saline water has been a recognized home treatment for symptoms of sore throat for many generations, there is no evidence suggesting its capability to kill the virus.The Department of Health has advised against spreading misinformation and unverified claims concerning the pandemic.The Philippine National Police has taken action against the spread of misinformation related to the pandemic and has warned the public that misinformation purveyors could be charged for violating Presidential Decree no.
90 for "declaring local rumor, mongering and spreading false information".
In the case of misinformation circulated online, violators could be charged for violating Cybercrime Prevention Act which has a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 12 years.According to the DOH, the cremation of the body of the first confirmed COVID-19 death in the Philippines has been hampered by the proliferation of misinformation.
2009 flu pandemic in the Philippines
Philippine Government's Online Portal for the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Updates on Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) by the Department of Health, Situation tracker, updated daily.
COVID-19 cases tracker by the Philippines' Department of Health
Worldwide Coronavirus Map, confirmed Cases – Map the route paths of coronavirus confirmed cases.
Unofficial COVID-19 Philippines Data and Case Tracker
A novel coronavirus (nCoV) is any recently discovered coronavirus of medical significance not yet permanently named.
Although coronaviruses are endemic in humans and infections are normally mild (such as the common cold, which is caused by human coronaviruses in about 15% of cases), cross-species transmission has produced some unusually virulent strains which can cause viral pneumonia and in serious cases even acute respiratory distress syndrome.
The following viruses could initially be referred to as "novel coronavirus", often with retroactive addition of the year of discovery, before being given a permanent designation:
All four viruses are part of the Betacoronavirus genus within the coronavirus family.
The word "novel" indicates a "new pathogen of a previously known type" (i.e. known family) of virus.
Use of the word conforms to best practices for naming new infectious diseases published by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2015.
Historically, pathogens have sometimes been named after locations, individuals, or specific species.
However, this practice is now explicitly discouraged by the WHO.The official permanent names for viruses and for diseases are determined by the ICTV and the WHO's ICD, respectively.
Coronavirus
Coronavirus disease
Coronavirus 229E
Coronavirus OC43
Coronavirus NL63
Bat SARS-like coronavirus WIV1
Misinformation related to the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic
After the initial outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), conspiracy theories and misinformation emerged online regarding the origin, scale, and various other aspects of the disease.
Various social media posts claimed the virus was a bio-weapon with a patented vaccine, a population control scheme, or the result of a spy operation.
On 2 February, the World Health Organization (WHO) described a "massive infodemic", citing an over-abundance of reported information, accurate and false, about the virus that "makes it hard for people to find trustworthy sources and reliable guidance when they need it."
The WHO stated that the high demand for timely and trustworthy information has incentivised the creation of a direct WHO 24/7 myth-busting hotline where its communication and social media teams have been monitoring and responding to misinformation through its website and social media pages.
The WHO specifically debunked as false some claims that have circulated on social media, including the claim that a person can tell if they have the virus or not simply by holding their breath; the claim that drinking lots of water will protect against the virus; and the claim that that gargling salt water will prevent infection.Facebook, Twitter and Google said they were working with WHO to address "misinformation".
In a blogpost, Facebook stated they would remove content flagged by leading global health organizations and local authorities that violate its content policy on misinformation leading to "physical harm".
Facebook is also giving free advertising to WHO.At the end of February, Amazon removed over one million products claiming to be able to cure or protect against coronavirus, and removed tens of thousands of listings for overpriced health products.
In January 2020, the BBC published an article about coronavirus misinformation, citing two 24 January articles from The Washington Times which claimed the virus was part of a Chinese biological weapons program, based at the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV).
The Washington Post later published an article debunking the conspiracy theory, citing US experts who explained why the institute was not suitable for bioweapon research, that most countries had abandoned bioweapons as fruitless, and that there was no evidence that the virus was genetically engineered.On 29 January, financial news website and blog ZeroHedge suggested, without evidence, that a scientist at the WIV created the COVID-19 strain responsible for the coronavirus outbreak.
Zerohedge listed the full contact details of the scientist supposedly responsible, a practice known as doxing, by including the scientist's name, photo and phone number, suggesting to readers that they "pay [the Chinese scientist] a visit" if they wanted to know "what really caused the coronavirus pandemic".
Twitter later permanently suspended the blog's account for violating its platform manipulation policy.In January 2020, Buzzfeed News also reported on an internet meme/conspiracy theory of a link between the logo of the WIV and "Umbrella Corporation", the agency that made the virus that starts the zombie apocalypse in the Resident Evil franchise.
The theory also saw a link between "Racoon" (the main city in Resident Evil), and an anagram of "Corona" (the name of the virus).
The popularity of this theory attracted the attention of Snopes, who proved it as false showing that the logo was not from the Institute, but from Shanghai Ruilan Bao Hu San Biotech Limited, located approximately 500 miles (800 km) away in Shanghai and additionally pointed out that the proper name of the city in Resident Evil is Raccoon City.In February 2020, US Senator Tom Cotton (R-AR) as well as Francis Boyle, a law professor, suggested that the virus may have been a Chinese bioweapon, while in the opinion of numerous medical experts there is no evidence for this.
Conservative political commentator Rush Limbaugh said on The Rush Limbaugh Show, the most popular radio show in the US, that the virus was probably "a ChiCom laboratory experiment" and that the Chinese were using the virus and the media hysteria surrounding it, to bring down Donald Trump.
In February 2020, The Financial Times reported from virus expert and global co-lead coronavirus investigator, Trevor Bedford, who said that "There is no evidence whatsoever of genetic engineering that we can find", and that, "The evidence we have is that the mutations [in the virus] are completely consistent with natural evolution".
Bedford further explained, "The most likely scenario, based on genetic analysis, was that the virus was transmitted by a bat to another mammal between 20–70 years ago.
This intermediary animal—not yet identified—passed it on to its first human host in the city of Wuhan in late November or early December 2019".The Inverse reported that "Christopher Bouzy, the founder of Bot Sentinel, did a Twitter analysis for Inverse and found [online] bots and trollbots are making an array of false claims.
These bots are claiming China intentionally created the virus, that it's a biological weapon, that Democrats are overstating the threat to hurt Donald Trump and more.
While we can't confirm the origin of these bots, they are decidedly pro-Trump."Misinformation aside, concerns on accidental leakage by the WIV remain.
In 2017, US molecular biologist Richard H. Ebright, expressed caution when the WIV was expanded to become mainland China's first biosafety level 4 (BSL–4) laboratory, noting previous escapes of the SARS virus at other Chinese laboratories.
While Ebright refuted several conspiracy theories regarding the WIV (e.g. bioweapons research, that the virus was engineered), he told BBC China that this did not represent the possibility of the virus being "completely ruled out" from entering the population due to a laboratory accident.
On 6 February, the White House asked scientists and medical researchers to rapidly investigate the origins of the virus in order to address both the current spread and "to inform future outbreak preparation and better understand animal/human and environmental transmission aspects of coronaviruses."MP Tobias Ellwood, chairperson of the Defence Select Committee of the UK House of Commons, also publicly questioned the role of the Chinese Army's Wuhan Institute for Biological Products and called for the "greater transparency over the origins of the coronavirus".South China Morning Post reported that one of the Institute's lead researchers, Shi Zhengli, was the particular focus of personal attacks in Chinese social media who alleged her work on bat-based viruses as the source of the virus, leading Shi to post: "I swear with my life, [the virus] has nothing to do with the lab", and when asked by the SCMP to comment on the attacks, Shi responded: "My time must be spent on more important matters".
Caixin reported Shi made further public statements against "perceived tinfoil-hat theories about the new virus's source", quoting her as saying: "The novel 2019 coronavirus is nature punishing the human race for keeping uncivilized living habits.
I, Shi Zhengli, swear on my life that it has nothing to do with our laboratory".Far-right commentator Josh Bernstein claimed that the Democratic Party and the "medical deep state" were collaborating with the Chinese government to create and release the coronavirus in order to bring down Donald Trump.
Bernstein went on to suggest that those responsible should be locked in a room with infected coronavirus patients as punishment.Fox News hosted Jerry Falwell Jr., the president of Liberty University, who promoted a conspiracy theory that North Korea and China conspired together to create the coronavirus.
He also said that people were overreacting to the coronavirus outbreak and that Democrats were trying to use the situation to harm President Trump.
On 22 February, US officials alleged that Russia is behind an ongoing disinformation campaign, using thousands of social media accounts on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to deliberately promote unfounded conspiracy theories, claiming that the virus is a biological weapon manufactured by the CIA and the US is waging economic war on China using the virus.
The acting assistant secretary of state for Europe and Eurasia, Philip Reeker, said that "Russia's intent is to sow discord and undermine US institutions and alliances from within" and "by spreading disinformation about coronavirus, Russian malign actors are once again choosing to threaten public safety by distracting from the global health response."
Russia denies the allegation, saying "this is a deliberately false story".According to US-based The National Interest magazine, although official Russian channels had been muted on pushing the US biowarfare conspiracy theory, other Russian media elements don't share the Kremlin's restraint.
Zvezda, a news outlet funded by the Russian Defense Ministry, published an article titled "Coronavirus: American biological warfare against Russia and China", claiming that the virus is intended to damage the Chinese economy, weakening its hand in the next round of trade negotiations.
Ultra-nationalist politician and leader of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, Vladimir Zhirinovsky, claimed on a Moscow radio station that the virus was an experiment by the Pentagon and pharmaceutical companies.
Politician Igor Nikulin made rounds on Russian television and news media, arguing that Wuhan was chosen for the attack because the presence of a BSL-4 virus lab provided a cover story for the Pentagon and CIA about a Chinese bio-experiment leak.
An EU-document claims 80 attempts by Russian media to spread disinformation related to the epidemic.
According to Radio Farda, Iranian cleric Seyyed Mohammad Saeedi accused US President Donald Trump of targeting Qom with coronavirus "to damage its culture and honor".
Saeedi claimed that Trump is fulfilling his promise to hit Iranian cultural sites, if Iranians took revenge for the US airstrike that killed of Quds Force Commander Qasem Soleimani.Iranian TV personality Ali Akbar Raefipour claimed that the coronavirus was part of a "hybrid warfare" programme waged by the United States on Iran and China.Brigadier General Gholam Reza Jalali, head of Iranian Civil Defense Organization, claimed that the coronavirus is likely a biological attack on China and Iran with economic goals.Hossein Salami, the head of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), claimed that the coronavirus outbreak in Iran may be due to a US "biological attack".
Several Iranian politicians, including Ali Khamenei, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, Rasoul Falahati, Alireza Panahian, Abolfazl Hasanbeigi and Gholamali Jafarzadeh Imanabadi, also made similar remarks.
However, Iran's deputy health minister Reza Malekzadeh rejected the biological warfare theory.Ayatollah Hashem Bathaie Golpayegani claimed that "America is the source of coronavirus, because America went head to head with China and realised it cannot keep up with it economically or militarily."Former Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad sent a letter to the United Nations on 9 March, claiming that "it is clear to the world that the mutated coronavirus was produced in lab" and that COVID-19 is "a new weapon for establishing and/or maintaining political and economic upper hand in the global arena."
According to London-based The Economist, China's internet is full of conspiracy theories about COVID-19 being the CIA's creation to keep China down.
Although biological warfare against Chinese troops in the Korean war is only considered an allegation in the US, it is considered official history in China, thus greatly helping these new theories gain credibility.Multiple conspiracy articles in Chinese from the SARS era resurfaced during the outbreak with altered details, claiming that SARS is biological warfare conducted by the US against China.
Some of these articles claim that BGI Group from China sold genetic information of the Chinese people to the US, with the US then being able to deploy the virus specifically targeting the genome of Chinese individuals.On 26 January, Chinese military news site Xilu published an article detailing how the virus was artificially combined by the US to "precisely target Chinese people".
The article was removed after early February.
Some articles on popular sites in Chinese have also cast suspicion on US military athletes participating in the Wuhan 2019 Military World Games, which lasted until the end of October 2019, and have suggested that they deployed the virus.
They claim the inattentive attitude and disproportionately below-average results of American athletes in the games indicate they might have been there for other purposes and they might actually be bio-warfare operatives.
Such posts stated that their place of residence during their stay in Wuhan was also close to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, where the first known cluster of cases occurred.In March 2020, this conspiracy theory was endorsed by Zhao Lijian, a spokesperson from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China.
On 13 March, the US government summoned Chinese Ambassador Cui Tiankai to Washington DC over the coronavirus conspiracy theory.
According to Washington DC-based nonprofit Middle East Media Research Institute, numerous writers in the Arabic press have promoted the conspiracy theory that COVID-19, as well as SARS and the swine flu virus, were deliberately created and spread by the US in order to sell vaccines against these diseases, and it is "part of an economic and psychological war waged by the US against China with the aim of weakening it and presenting it as a backward country and a source of diseases".
Iraqi political analyst Sabah Al-Akili on Al-Etejah TV, Saudi daily Al-Watan writer Sa'ud Al-Shehry, Syrian daily Al-Thawra columnist Hussein Saqer, and Egyptian journalist Ahmad Rif'at on Egyptian news website Vetogate, were some examples given by MEMRI as propagators of the US biowarfare conspiracy theory in the Arabic world.
A Filipino Senator, Tito Sotto, played a bioweapon conspiracy video in a February 2020 Senate hearing, suggesting that the coronavirus is biowarfare waged against China.
Constituent Assembly member Elvis Méndez declared that the coronavirus is a "bacteriological sickness created in '89, in '90 and historically" and that it was a sickness "inoculated by the gringos".
Méndez theorized that the virus was a weapon against Latin America and China and that its purpose was "to demoralize the person, to weaken in order to install their system".
Iran's Press TV asserted that "Zionist elements developed a deadlier strain of coronavirus against Iran".
Similarly, various Arab media outlets accused Israel and the United States of creating and spreading COVID-19, avian flu, and SARS.
Users on social media offered a variety of theories, including the supposition that Jews had manufactured COVID-19 to precipitate a global stock market collapse and thereby profit via insider trading, while a guest on Turkish television posited a more ambitious scenario in which Jews and Zionists had created COVID-19, avian flu, and Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever in order to "design the world, seize countries, [and] neuter the world's population".Israeli attempts to develop a COVID-19 vaccine prompted mixed reactions.
Grand Ayatollah Naser Makarem Shirazi denied initial reports that he had ruled that a Zionist-made vaccine would be halal, and one Press TV journalist tweeted that "I'd rather take my chances with the virus than consume an Israeli vaccine".
A columnist for the Turkish Yeni Akit asserted that such a vaccine could be a ruse to carry out mass sterilization.
Some people have alleged that the coronavirus was stolen from a Canadian virus research lab by Chinese scientists.
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada said that conspiracy theory had "no factual basis".
The stories seem to have been derived from a July 2019 news article stating that some Chinese researchers had their security access to a Canadian Level 4 virology facility revoked in an federal police investigation; Canadian officials described this as an administrative matter and said that "there is absolutely no risk to the Canadian public".
This article was published by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC); responding to the conspiracy theories, the CBC later stated that "CBC reporting never claimed the two scientists were spies, or that they brought any version of the coronavirus to the lab in Wuhan".
While pathogen samples were transferred from the lab in Winnipeg, Canada to Beijing, China, on 31 March 2019, neither of the samples was a coronavirus, the Public Health Agency of Canada says that the shipment conformed to all federal policies, and there has not been any statement that the researchers under investigation were responsible for sending the shipment.
The current location of the researchers under investigation by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is not being released.
In the midst of the coronavirus epidemic, a senior research associate and expert in biological warfare with the Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies, referring to a NATO press conference, identified suspicions of espionage as the reason behind the expulsions from the lab, but made no suggestion that coronavirus was taken from the Canadian lab or that it is the result of bioweapons defense research in China.
According to the BBC, Jordan Sather, a conspiracy theory YouTuber supporting the far-right QAnon conspiracy theory and the anti-vax movement, has falsely claimed the outbreak was a population control scheme created by Pirbright Institute in England and by former Microsoft CEO Bill Gates.
There are theories that claim that Lysol-brand spray desinfectants are proof that governments have known about the coronavirus since long before the outbreak occured, since cans of Lysol spray desinfectant claim to be effective against "Human Coronavirus".
The theory also suggested that such labeling has been present on cans of Lysol spray desinfectant since the early 1960's, and that hence, governments have secretly known about the coronavirus ever since then.
Reckitt Benckiser, the owner of the Lysol brand, responded stating that coronaviruses are a family of viruses, and that their product has not yet been tested against the current strain of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2).
On 24 January, a video circulated online appearing to be of a nurse named Jin Hui in Hubei describing a far more dire situation in Wuhan than purported by Chinese officials.
The video claimed that more than 90,000 people had been infected with the virus in China, the virus can spread from one person to 14 people and the virus is starting the second mutation.
The video attracted millions of views on various social media platforms and was mentioned in numerous online reports.
However, the BBC noted that contrary to its English subtitles in one of the video's existing versions, the woman does not claim to be either a nurse or a doctor in the video and that her suit and mask do not match the ones worn by medical staff in Hubei.
The video's claim of 90,000 infected cases is noted to be 'unsubstantiated'.
On 25 February, Taiwan News published an article, claiming Tencent accidentally leaked the real numbers of death and infection in China.
Taiwan News suggests the Tencent Epidemic Situation Tracker had briefly showed infected cases and death tolls many times higher of the official figure, citing a Facebook post by 38-year-old Taiwanese beverage store owner Hiroki Lo and an anonymous Taiwanese netizen.
The article was referenced by other news outlets such as Daily Mail and widely circulated on Twitter, Facebook, 4chan, sparked a wide range of conspiracy theories that the screenshot indicates the real death toll instead of the ones published by health officials.
Justin Lessler, associate professor at the Bloomberg School of Public Health, claims the numbers of the alleged "leak" are unreasonable and unrealistic, citing the case fatality rate as far lower than the 'leaked information'.
A spokesman of Tencent responded to the news article, claiming the image was doctored, and it features "false information which we never published".Keoni Everington, author of the original news article, defended and asserted the authenticity of the leak.
Brian Hioe and Lars Wooster of New Bloom Magazine debunked the theory from data on other websites, which were using Tencent's database to generate custom visualizations while showing none of the inflated figures appearing in the images promulgated by Taiwan News.
Thus, they concluded the screenshot was digitally fabricated.
On 26 February 2020, Taiwanese Central News Agency reported that large amounts of misinformation had appeared on Facebook claiming the pandemic in Taiwan had lost control, the Taiwanese Government had covered up the total number of cases, and that President Tsai Ing-wen had been infected.
The Taiwan fact-checking organization had suggested the misinformation on Facebook shared similarities with mainland China due to its use of simplified Chinese and mainland China vocabulary.
The organization warns the purpose of the misinformation is to attack the government.In March 2020, Taiwan's Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau warned that mainland China was trying to undermine trust in factual news by portraying the Taiwanese Government reports as fake news.
Taiwanese authorities are investigating whether these messages were linked to instructions given by the Communist Party of China.
The PRC's Taiwan Affairs Office refuted the claims calling them lies and said that Taiwan's Democratic Progressive Party was "inciting hatred" between the two sides.
In early February, a decade-old map illustrating a hypothetical viral outbreak published by the World Population Project (part of the University of Southampton) was misappropriated by a number of Australian media news outlets (and British tabloids The Sun, Daily Mail and Metro) which claimed the map represented the 2020 coronavirus outbreak.
This misinformation was then spread via the social media accounts of the same media outlets, and while some outlets later removed the map, the BBC reported that a number of news sites had yet to retract the map.
It was reported that multiple social media posts have promoted a conspiracy theory claiming the virus was known and that a vaccine was already available.
PolitiFact and FactCheck.org noted that no vaccine currently exists for COVID-19.
The patents cited by various social media posts reference existing patents for genetic sequences and vaccines for other strains of coronavirus such as the SARS coronavirus.
The WHO reported as of 5 February 2020 that amid news reports of "breakthrough" drugs being discovered to treat people infected with the virus, there were no known effective treatments; this included antibiotics and herbal remedies not being useful.
Scientists are working to develop a vaccine, but as of March 18, 2020, no vaccine candidates have completed clinical trials.
Several viral tweets purporting that snorting cocaine would sterilize one's nostrils of the coronavirus spread around Europe and Africa.
In response, the French Ministry of Health released a PSA debunking this claim, as did the World Health Organisation.
Beginning on 11 February, reports, quickly spread via Facebook, implied that a Cameroonian student in China had been completely cured of the virus due to his African genetics.
While a student was successfully treated, other media sources have noted that no evidence implies Africans are more resistant to the virus and labeled such claims as false information.
Kenyan Secretary of Health Mutahi Kagwe explicitly refuted rumors that "those with black skin cannot get coronavirus", while announcing Kenya's first case on 13 March.
In February 2020, BBC reported that conspiracy theorists on social media groups alleged a link between coronavirus and 5G mobile networks, claiming that Wuhan and Diamond Princess outbreaks were directly caused by electromagnetic fields and the introduction of 5G and wireless technologies.
Some conspiracy theorists also alleged that the coronavirus outbreak was cover-up for a 5G-related illness.
In March 2020, a video by Thomas Cowan, M.D, alleged that coronavirus is caused by 5G, based on the claims that African countries were not affected significantly by the pandemic and Africa was not a 5G region.
Both the claims and the video, latter of which was endorsed by singer Keri Hilson, were criticized on social media and debunked by Reuters, USA Today, Full Fact and American Public Health Association executive director Georges C. Benjamin.
Hundreds of pets in China and elsewhere have been abandoned under the misbelief that common household pets, like dogs and cats, can get infected and spread the disease.
There is little evidence that supports that dogs can get infected with the virus and spread it, however, dogs may get contaminated with the virus.
Widely circulated posts on social media have claimed that, among other things:
Consuming boiled ginger with an empty stomach can kill the coronavirus,
Drinking lemon with water can be used to prevent the coronavirus and cancer, as it increases Vitamin C levels,
Holding one's breath for 10 seconds is an effective self-test for the coronavirus,
Hot saunas and hair dryers can kill the coronavirus,
An ancient Sri Lankan drink can prevent the coronavirus
UV-C light, chlorine, and high (over 56 °C) temperatures can be used to kill the coronavirus.All of the above claims have been disproven.
For example, UV-C light, chlorine and high temperatures may cause skin irritation and burns if used on human skin.
It is still unknown if temperatures above 56 °C can kill SARS-CoV 2.
Ginger has not been proven to cure any viral illness, and Vitamin C has also not been proven to be effective against the coronavirus.
In Brazil, a video was widely shared claiming that vinegar was more effective than hand sanitiser against the coronavirus.
That was disproved, as "there is no evidence that acetic acid is effective against the virus" and, even if there was, "its concentration in common household vinegar is low".Chloroform and ether based drug loló was said to cure the disease in messages spread in Brazil.
Other so called cures in messages spreading in Brazil were avocado and mint tea, hot whiskey and honey, essential oils, vitamins C and D, fennel tea (supposedly similar to the medicine Tamiflu, according to a false e-mail attributed to a hospital director) and cocaine.
Various national and party-held Chinese media heavily advertised an "overnight research" report by Wuhan Institute of Virology and Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, on how shuanghuanglian, an herb mixture from traditional Chinese medicine, can effectively inhibit the novel coronavirus.
The report has led to a purchase craze of shuanghuanglian.
On 27 February 2020, the Estonian Minister of the Interior Mart Helme stated at a government press conference that the common cold had been renamed as the coronavirus and that in his youth nothing like that existed.
He recommended wearing warm socks and mustard patches as well as spreading goose fat on one's chest as treatments for the virus.
Helme also said that the virus would pass within a few days to a week just like the common cold.
Despite the coronavirus outbreak, the Church of Greece announced that the Holy Communion, in which churchgoers eat pieces of bread soaked in wine from the same chalice, will continue as a practice.
The Holy Synod stated that the Holy Communion "cannot be the cause of the spread of illness", with Metropolitan Seraphim saying that the wine was without blemish because it represented the blood and body of Christ, and that "whoever attends Holy Communion is approaching God, who has the power to heal".New Democracy MP Elena Rapti also said that she was going and that if there was deep faith, the Communion was healing.
The Church furthermore refused to restrict Christians from taking the Holy Communion.
In public statements, several clerics urged worshippers to continue taking part in the Holy Communion, justifying it by saying that Jesus never got sick, while the Bishop of Piraeus Seraphim announced that only those who took part in masses without true faith could be affected.
There were furthermore reports that the CoVid 19 hotline was informing concerned believers that there was no risk of contagion at the sacrament.Some high-profile Greek medical doctors publicly supported the continuation of practicing Holy Communion, causing a sharp reaction by the Greek Association of Hospital Doctors.
Eleni Giamarellou, a professor of infectious diseases at the University of Athens, announced that there was no danger, and that she was accepting communion with faith in God, so she could not become infected.
The Greek Association of Hospital Doctors criticized these professionals for putting their religious beliefs before science.It was also reported that a right-wing populist party leader of the party Greek Solution, Kyriakos Velopoulos, sells a hand cream via his TV shop, which supposedly would completely kill COVID-19, although the alleged miracle drug is not approved by medical authorities.
Political activist Swami Chakrapani and Member of the Legislative Assembly Suman Haripriya claimed that drinking cow urine and applying cow dung on the body can cure coronavirus.
WHO's chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan rubbished such claims and criticized these politicians for spreading misinformation.
Parliamentarian Ramesh Bidhuri of Bharatiya Janata Party claimed that as per experts using Namaste as a greeting prevents contamination from the Covid-19, but using Arabic greetings like Adab or As-salamu alaykum does not as it directs the air into the mouth.
Misinformation that the government is spreading "anti-corona" drug in the country during Janata curfew, a stay-at-home curfew enforced in India, went viral on social media.
The vibration generated by clapping together during Janata curfew will kill the virus was debunked by the media.
One viral message says that the lifetime of coronavirus is only 12 hours and staying home for 14 hours during Janata curfew break the chain of transmission.
Another message claimed that observing Janata curfew will result in the reduction of coronavirus cases by 40%.
Following the first reported case of COVID-19 in Nigeria on 28 February, untested cures and treatments began to spread via platforms like WhatsApp.
South Korean "conservative populist" Jun Kwang-hun told his followers that there was no risk to mass public gatherings as the virus was impossible to contract outdoors.
Many of his followers are elderly.
Some QAnon proponents, including Jordan Sather, and others, have promoted gargling "Miracle Mineral Supplement" (actually an industrial bleach) as a way of preventing or curing the disease.In February 2020, televangelist Jim Bakker promoted a colloidal silver solution sold on his website, as a remedy for coronavirus COVID-19; naturopath Sherrill Sellman, a guest on his show, falsely stated that it "hasn't been tested on this strain of the coronavirus, but it's been tested on other strains of the coronavirus and has been able to eliminate it within 12 hours."
The US Food and Drug Administration and New York Attorney General's office both issued a cease-and-desist orders against Bakker, and he was sued by the state of Missouri over the sales.
The New York Attorney General's office also issued a cease-and-desist order to radio host Alex Jones, who was selling silver-infused toothpaste that he falsely claimed can kill the virus and had been verified by federal officials, causing a Jones spokesman to deny the products had been sold for the purpose of treating any disease.Another televangelist, Kenneth Copeland, claimed on Victory channel during a programme called "Standing Against Coronavirus", that he can cure television viewers of COVID-19 directly from the TV studio.
The viewers had to touch the television screen to receive the spiritual healing.
Claims that hand sanitiser is merely "antibacterial not antiviral", and therefore not effective against the coronavirus, have spread widely on Twitter and other social networks, not only in the US but also elsewhere.
While the effectiveness of sanitiser depends on the specific ingredients, most hand sanitiser sold commercially does kill the coronavirus.In March 2020, the Miami New Times reported that managers at Norwegian Cruise Line had prepared a set of responses intended to convince wary customers to book cruises, including "blatantly false" claims that the coronavirus "can only survive in cold temperatures, so the Caribbean is a fantastic choice for your next cruise", that "[s]cientists and medical professionals have confirmed that the warm weather of the spring will be the end of the [c]oronavirus", and that the virus "cannot live in the amazingly warm and tropical temperatures that your cruise will be sailing to."
Scientists caution that this is possible, but not guaranteed.
Claims that The Simpsons had predicted the coronavirus pandemic in 1993, accompanied by a doctored screenshot from the show (where the text "Corona Virus" was layered over the original text "Apocalypse Meow", without blocking it from view), were later found out to be false, with the claim being widely spread on social media.
A fake Costco product recall notice circulated on social media purporting that Kirkland-brand bath tissue had been contaminated with COVID-19 [sic] due to the item being made in China.
No evidence supports that SARS-CoV 2 can survive for prolonged periods of time (like what might happen during shipping) on surfaces, and Costco has not issued such a recall.
On 27 February 2020, María Alejandra Díaz, a member of the Venezuelan Constituent Assembly, promoted a recipe that she claimed would cure COVID-19.
The recipe consisted of ingredients often purported to prevent and cure colds, including lemon grass, elder, ginger, black pepper, lemon and honey.
Díaz also described the virus as a bioterrorism weapon.
Whistleblowing from various Chinese doctors, including Li Wenliang on 30 December 2019 revealed that Wuhan hospital authorities were already aware that the virus was a SARS-like coronavirus and patients were already placed under quarantine.
The Wuhan Health Commission still insisted that the illness spreading in Wuhan at the time was not SARS on 5 January 2020.In the early stages of the outbreak, the Chinese National Health Commission said that they had no "clear evidence" of human-to-human transmissions.
Later research published on 20 January 2020 indicated that among officially confirmed cases, human-to-human transmission may have started in December of the previous year, and the delay of disclosure on the results until then, rather than earlier in January, was met with criticism towards health authorities.
Wang Guangfa, one of the health officials, said that "There was uncertainty regarding the human-to-human transmission", but he was infected by a patient within 10 days of making the statement.On 27 January 2020, the Daily Beast reported the editor of state-owned People's Daily tweeted an image of a modular container building used for marketing purposes by Henan K-Home Steel Structure Co., Ltd. and not of the actual hospital.
The tweet stated that the 1st building of the Huoshenshan Hospital had been completed in 16 hours.
Some claim this post is part of the Chinese government's misinformation campaign to hype certain aspects of the government’s response.
The tweet was later removed and replaced with a video of the modular container buildings being assembled at Huoshenshan Hospital again stating the first building had been completed in 16 hours.On 15 February 2020, China's paramount leader and Party general secretary Xi Jinping published an article which claimed he had been aware of the epidemic since 7 January 2020 and issued an order to contain the spread of the disease during a meeting on that day.
However, a record of that same meeting released beforehand shows that there was zero mention of the epidemic throughout.
Chinese government officials launched a coordinated disinformation campaign seeking to spread doubt about the origin of the coronavirus and its outbreak.
A review of Chinese state media and social media posts in early March 2020, conducted by the Washington Post, found that anti-American conspiracy theories circulating among Chinese users "gained steam through a mix of unexplained official statements magnified by social media, censorship and doubts stoked by state media and government officials."
U.S. Department of State officials, as well as University of Chicago political science professor Dali Yang, an authority on Chinese politics, have stated that the Chinese campaign appears intended to deflect attention away from the Chinese government's mishandling of the crisis.At a press conference on March 12, 2020, two spokesmen for the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Zhao Lijian and Geng Shuang) promoted the conspiracy theory that the coronavirus had been "bio-engineered" by Western powers; and suggested that the U.S. government, specifically the U.S. Army, had spread the virus.
No evidence supports these claims.
Zhao also pushed these conspiracy theories on Twitter, which is blocked in mainland China but is used as a public diplomacy tool by Chinese officials, who use the platform to promote the Chinese government and defend it against criticism.
China's ambassador to South Africa also amplified these claims on Twitter.
Other Chinese online posts have criticized the Japanese and Italian governments.The Chinese disinformation campaign was condemned by the U.S. Department of State, who criticized Chinese authorities for spreading "dangerous and ridiculous" conspiracy claims.
The U.S. summoned China's ambassador to the United States, Cui Tiankai, to issue a "stern representation" over the Chinese government's claims.
In Cuba, Cuban president Miguel Díaz Canel claimed on Twitter that Cuban Interferon alfa-2b was being used to treat and cure COVID-19 in China, linking to an article written by state-owned newspaper Granma.[1] The Chinese embassy in Cuba also made similar claims.
Several Latin American news outlets relayed the story, which was also relayed on social media, and the claims were eventually translated to Portuguese and French.
In reality, the interferon was made by a Chinese company, in China, using Cuban technology, and it was under clinical trials in China as a potential cure, but it was not actively being used as such, as the claims suggested.
US President Donald Trump and his top economic adviser Larry Kudlow have been accused of spreading misinformation about the coronavirus.
On 25 February, Trump said, "I think that whole situation will start working out.
We're very close to a vaccine."
SARS-CoV-2 has been "community-spreading" in the United States undetected for weeks, and new vaccine development may require a minimum of a year to prove safety and efficacy to gain regulatory approval.
In an interview with Sean Hannity on 4 March, Trump also claimed that the death rate published by the WHO is false (that the correct fatality rate was less than 1 percent, and said, "Well, I think the 3.4 percent is really a false number."), that the potential impact of the outbreak is exaggerated by Democrats plotting against him, and that it is safe for infected individuals to go to work.
In a later tweet, Trump denied he made claims regarding infected individuals going to work, despite footage from the interview.The White House has accused the media of intentionally stoking fears of the virus to destabilize the administration.
The Stat News reported that "President Trump and members of his administration have also said that US containment of the virus is 'close to airtight' and that the virus is only as deadly as the seasonal flu.
Their statements range from false to unproven, and in some cases, underestimate the challenges that public health officials must contend with in responding to the virus."
Around the same time that the "airtight" claim was made, SARS-CoV-2 was already past containment because the first case of community spread of the virus was confirmed, and it was spreading faster than severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus with a case fatality rate at least seven times the fatality rate for seasonal flu.Several members of the U.S. Senate—particularly Richard Burr (R-NC) and Kelly Loeffler (R-GA)—have come under scrutiny for sales of large amounts of stocks before the financial markets crashed due to the outbreak, sparking accusations that they may had insider knowledge from close-door briefings, while many of them publicly downplayed the risks posed by the health crisis to the U.S. public.On March 20, Trump falsely claimed that the drug chloroquine was approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a treatment for COVID-19.
This led the FDA to state that it had not approved any drugs or therapies for COVID-19.
While Trump claimed that "we're going to be able to make that drug available almost immediately", the leader of the FDA stated that the drug would still need to be tested in a "large, pragmatic clinical trial" on subjects infected with COVID-19.
The European Union watchdog group EUvsDisinfo reported that Russia was pushing false information related to the SARS-2 pandemic.
On March 18, Russian presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov denounced findings.
The UN WHO has warned of criminal scams where perpetrators misrepresent themselves as representatives of the WHO seeking personal information from victims via email or phone.Cybersecurity Check Point says there has been a large increase in phishing attacks to lure victims into unwittingly installing a computer virus under the guise of coronavirus-themed emails containing attachments.
They use fake domains such as "cdc-gov.org" instead of the correct "cdc.gov", or even spoof the original domain so it looks real.
Over 4,000 coronavirus-related domains have been registered.Police in New Jersey, USA reported incidents of criminals knocking on people's doors and claiming to be from the CDC.
They attempt to sell products at inflated prices or otherwise scam victims under the guise of educating and protecting the public from the coronavirus.Links that purport to go to the Johns Hopkins University coronavirus map, but instead go to a fake site that spreads malware have been circulating on the Internet.
Some media outlets, including Daily Mail and RT, as well as individuals spread misinformation by circulating a video that showed a young Chinese woman eating a bat and falsely suggesting that it was shot in Wuhan.
The widely circulated video contains unrelated footage of a Chinese travel vlogger, Wang Mengyun, eating bat soup in the island country of Palau in 2016.
Wang posted an apology on Weibo, in which she said that she had received threats, and that she had only wanted to showcase Palauan cuisine.
The spread of misinformation about eating bats is rooted in xenophobic and  racist sentiment toward Asians.
Scientists suggest that the virus originated in bats and migrated into an intermediary host animal before infecting people.
Some organizations, including PETA, and individuals made false claims on social media that eating meat made people susceptible to the virus.In India, a false rumour spread online alleging that only people who eat meat were affected by coronavirus, causing "#NoMeat_NoCoronaVirus" to trend on Twitter.
A poll was released showing that 38% of American beer-drinkers have refused to drink Corona beer.
This statistic is not considered a reliable indication of an American belief that drinking the beer causes the virus, even though assumptions have been made along this line in the media and among the public.
There is no link between the virus and the beer.
During the pandemic, many false and misleading images or news reports about the environmental impact of the coronavirus pandemic were shared by clickbait journalism sources and social media.
A viral post that originated on Weibo and spread on Twitter claimed that a pack of elephants descended on a village under quarantine in China's Yunnan Province, got drunk on corn wine, and passed out in a tea garden.
The state-owned China News Service debunked the claim that the elephants got drunk on corn wine and noted that wild elephants were a common sight in the village; the image attached to the post was originally taken at the Asian Elephant Research Center in Yunnan in December 2019.
Following reports of reduced pollution levels in Italy as a result of lockdowns, images purporting to show swans and dolphins swimming in Venice canals went viral on social media.
The image of the swans was revealed to have been taken in Burano, where swans are common, while footage of the dolphins was filmed at a port in Sardinia hundreds of miles away.
The Venice mayor's office clarified that the reported water clarity in the canals was due to the lack of sediment being kicked up by boat traffic, not due to a lack of water pollution that was initially reported.
List of conspiracy theories
SARS conspiracy theory
Allegations of biological warfare in the Korean War – similar episodes of psychological warfare followed allegations of biological warfare during the Korean War.
1.^ The Granma is owned by the ruling political party in Cuba, the Communist Party of Cuba.
World Health Organization: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public: Myth busters
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), previously known by the provisional name 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus.
It is contagious in humans and is the cause of the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) that has been designated a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization (WHO).SARS-CoV-2 has close genetic similarity to bat coronaviruses, from which it likely originated.
An intermediate animal reservoir such as a pangolin is also thought to be involved in its introduction to humans.
From a taxonomic perspective, SARS-CoV-2 is classified as a strain of the species severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARSr-CoV).The strain was first discovered in Wuhan, China, so it has sometimes been referred to as the "Wuhan virus" or "Wuhan coronavirus".
Because the World Health Organization discourages the use of names based upon locations and to avoid confusion with the disease SARS, it sometimes refers to the virus as "the virus responsible for COVID-19" or "the COVID-19 virus" in public health communications.
Both the virus and the disease are often called "coronavirus" by the general public, but scientists and most journalists typically use more precise terms.
Human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been confirmed during the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic.
Transmission occurs primarily via respiratory droplets from coughs and sneezes within a range of about 2 metres (6 ft 7 in).
Indirect contact via contaminated surfaces is another possible cause of infection.
Preliminary research indicates that the virus may remain viable on plastic and steel for up to three days, but does not survive on cardboard for more than one day or on copper for more than four hours, and is inactivated by soap.
Viral RNA has also been found in stool samples from infected people.Whether the virus is infectious during the incubation period is uncertain.
On 1 February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) indicated that "transmission from asymptomatic cases is likely not a major driver of transmission".
However, an epidemiological model of the beginning of the outbreak in China suggested that "pre-symptomatic shedding may be typical among documented infections" and that subclinical infections may have been the source of a majority of infections.
The first known infections from the SARS-CoV-2 strain were discovered in Wuhan, China.
The original source of viral transmission to humans and when the strain became pathogenic remains unclear.
Research into the natural reservoir of the virus strain that caused the 2002–2004 SARS outbreak has resulted in the discovery of many SARS-like bat coronaviruses, most originating in the Rhinolophus genus of horseshoe bats, and two viral nucleic acid sequences found in samples taken from Rhinolophus sinicus show a resemblance of 80% to SARS-CoV-2.
A third viral nucleic acid sequence from Rhinolophus affinis, collected in Yunnan province and designated RaTG13, has a 96% resemblance to SARS-CoV-2.
The WHO considers bats the most likely natural reservoir of SARS-CoV-2, but differences between the bat coronavirus and SARS-CoV-2 suggest that humans were infected via an intermediate host.A metagenomic study published in 2019 previously revealed that SARS-CoV, the strain of the virus that causes SARS, was the most widely distributed coronavirus among a sample of Sunda pangolins.
On 7 February 2020, it was announced that researchers from Guangzhou had discovered a pangolin sample with a viral nucleic acid sequence "99% identical" to SARS-CoV-2.
When released, the results clarified that "the receptor-binding domain of the S protein of the newly discovered Pangolin-CoV is virtually identical to that of 2019-nCoV, with one amino acid difference."
Pangolins are protected under Chinese law, but their poaching and trading for use in traditional Chinese medicine remains common.Microbiologists and geneticists in Texas have independently found evidence of reassortment in coronaviruses suggesting involvement of pangolins in the origin of SARS-CoV-2.
However, pangolin coronaviruses found to date only share at most 92% of their whole genomes with SARS-CoV-2, making them less similar than RaTG13 to SARS-CoV-2.
This is insufficient to prove pangolins to be the intermediate host; in comparison, the SARS virus responsible for the 2002–2004 outbreak shared 99.8% of its genome with a known civet coronavirus.
SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the broad family of viruses known as coronaviruses.
It is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (+ssRNA) virus.
Other coronaviruses are capable of causing illnesses ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
It is the seventh known coronavirus to infect people, after 229E, NL63, OC43, HKU1, MERS-CoV, and the original SARS-CoV.Like the SARS-related coronavirus strain implicated in the 2003 SARS outbreak, SARS-CoV-2 is a member of the subgenus Sarbecovirus (beta-CoV lineage B).
Its RNA sequence is approximately 30,000 bases in length.
SARS-CoV-2 is unique among known betacoronaviruses in its incorporation of a polybasic cleavage site, a characteristic known to increase pathogenicity and transmissibility in other viruses.With a sufficient number of sequenced genomes, it is possible to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree of the mutation history of a family of viruses.
By 12 January 2020, five genomes of SARS-CoV-2 had been isolated from Wuhan and reported by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) and other institutions; the number of genomes increased to 42 by 30 January 2020.
A phylogenetic analysis of those samples showed they were "highly related with at most seven mutations relative to a common ancestor", implying that the first human infection occurred in November or December 2019.
As of 13 March 2020, 410 SARS-CoV-2 genomes sampled on five continents were publicly available.On 11 February 2020, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) announced that according to existing rules that compute hierarchical relationships among coronaviruses on the basis of five conserved sequences of nucleic acids, the differences between what was then called 2019-nCoV and the virus strain from the 2003 SARS outbreak were insufficient to make them separate viral species.
Therefore, they identified 2019-nCoV as a strain of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus.
Each SARS-CoV-2 virion is approximately 50–200 nanometres in diameter.
Like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-2 has four structural proteins, known as the S (spike), E (envelope), M (membrane), and N (nucleocapsid) proteins; the N protein holds the RNA genome, and the S, E, and M proteins together create the viral envelope.
The spike protein, which has been imaged at the atomic level using cryogenic electron microscopy, is the protein responsible for allowing the virus to attach to the membrane of a host cell.Protein modeling experiments on the spike protein of the virus soon suggested that SARS-CoV-2 has sufficient affinity to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors of human cells to use them as a mechanism of cell entry.
By 22 January 2020, a group in China working with the full virus genome and a group in the United States using reverse genetics methods independently and experimentally demonstrated that ACE2 could act as the receptor for SARS-CoV-2.
Studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2 has a higher affinity to human ACE2 than the original SARS virus strain.
SARS-CoV-2 may also use basigin to gain cell entry.Initial spike protein priming by transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) is essential for entry of SARS-CoV-2.
After a SARS-CoV-2 virion attaches to a target cell, the cell's protease TMPRSS2 cuts open the spike protein of the virus, exposing a fusion peptide.
The virion then releases RNA into the cell, forcing the cell to produce copies of the virus that are disseminated to infect more cells.
SARS-CoV-2 produces at least three virulence factors that promote shedding of new virions from host cells and inhibit immune response.
Based upon the low variability exhibited among known SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences, the strain is thought to have been detected by health authorities within weeks of its emergence among the human population in late 2019.
The earliest case of infection currently known is thought to have been found on 17 November 2019.
The virus subsequently spread to all provinces of China and to more than one hundred other countries in Asia, Europe, North America, South America, Africa, and Oceania.
Human-to-human transmission of the virus has been confirmed in all of these regions.
On 30 January 2020, SARS-CoV-2 was designated a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the WHO, and on 11 March 2020 the WHO declared it a pandemic.As of 22 March 2020 (18:45 UTC), there were 328,275 confirmed cases of infection, of which 81,397 were in mainland China.
While the proportion of infections that result in confirmed infection or progress to diagnosable disease remains unclear, one mathematical model estimated the number of people infected in Wuhan alone at 75,815 as of 25 January 2020, at a time when confirmed infections were far lower.
The total number of deaths attributed to the virus was 14,366 as of 22 March 2020 (18:45 UTC); 94,704 people had recovered from infection by that time.
Under a third of all deaths have occurred in Hubei province, where Wuhan is located.
Before 24 February 2020, the proportion was over 95%.The basic reproduction number (
R
0
{\displaystyle R_{0}}
) of the virus has been estimated to be between 1.4 and 3.9.
This means that each infection from the virus is expected to result in 1.4 to 3.9 new infections when no members of the community are immune and no preventive measures are taken.
"Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)".
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
11 February 2020.
"Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak".
World Health Organization (WHO).
"SARS-CoV-2 (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) Sequences".
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
"COVID-19 Resource Centre".
The Lancet.
"Coronavirus (Covid-19)".
The New England Journal of Medicine.
"Covid-19: Novel Coronavirus Content Free to Access".
Wiley.
"2019-nCoV Data Portal".
Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource.
2020 coronavirus pandemic in Australia
This article documents the impacts of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic in Australia, and may not include all the contemporary major responses and measures.
As of 22 March 2020, 1352 cases had been reported in Australia, with the highest number of cases being in New South Wales, with 532.
The first case to be recorded in Australia was on 25 January 2020 in Victoria, when a man returning from Wuhan, China, was tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
A social distancing rule of 4 square metres per person in any enclosed space was enforced by the Australian Government on 21 March.
On 22 March 2020, the State Governments of New South Wales and Victoria reacted to the pandemic by enforcing mandatory closures of non-essential services, while the Governments of Western Australia and South Australia enacted border closures.
The Australian government announced a closure of places of social gathering from midday 23 March.
On 23 January, biosecurity officials began screening arrivals on the three weekly flights to Sydney from Wuhan.
Passengers were given an information sheet and asked to present themselves if they had a fever or suspect they might have the disease.On 25 January, the first case of a SARS-CoV-2 infection was reported, that of a Chinese citizen who arrived from Guangzhou on 19 January.
The patient received treatment in Melbourne.
On the same day, three other patients tested positive in Sydney after returning from Wuhan.On 27 January, a fifth case in Australia (fourth in NSW) was reported.
It was a 21-year-old patient who returned from Wuhan and underwent treatment at Westmead Hospital in Sydney.On 29 January, two more cases were reported: a 60-year-old resident being the second case in Victoria, and Queensland had the first case with a 44-year-old Chinese national from Wuhan.On 30 January, two more Chinese nationals tested positive: one in Victoria and one in Queensland.On 31 January, the government announced that foreign nationals returning from China were required to spend a fortnight in a third country before being allowed into Australia.
On 1 February, the 10th case in Australia was reported: a woman in her 20s in Victoria who returned from Wuhan.On 2 February, two cases were reported in South Australia: a 60-year-old man and a 60-year-old woman who had returned from Wuhan on 20 January.By 6 February, the number of cases had risen to 15 with three more cases in Queensland: comprising a group of three returning from a tour group in Wuhan.In the rest of February, there were eleven more cases.
Of the 24 Australians infected on the Diamond Princess cruise ship, eight were sent to Darwin for two weeks of quarantine.
The number repatriated from the ship are included in the state totals as follows:: Qld (3), SA (1), Vic (4), WA (2, one of whom died on 1 March).On 27 February, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced that the country was activating the Australian Health Sector Emergency Response Plan for Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19), stating that the rapid spread of the virus outside of China had prompted the government to elevate its response.On 28 February, Queensland reported a new case: a 63-year-old woman who had returned from Iran three days earlier.On 29 February, after the case in Queensland, the government extended the enforced quarantine to people returning from Iran, requiring them to spend a fortnight in a third country before being allowed into Australia.
On 1 March, Australia reported the first death from COVID-19: a 78-year-old Perth man, who was one of the passengers from the Diamond Princess, and who had been evacuated and was being treated in Western Australia.Also on that day, three more cases were confirmed, with two in NSW and one in Victoria, all the cases coming from Iran.
In the NSW cases, a man in his 40s and a woman in her 50s had been on two different flights before they developed symptoms.
The Victorian case was a woman in her 30s who had arrived in Melbourne on 27 February after catching a plane which travelled through Kuala Lumpur and Bali.On 2 March, four new cases were reported, two of which were the first cases of community transmission of the virus.
These two cases were acquired in Australia whereas all other previous cases were imported from another country.
The two cases were in NSW: one was acquired from a close relative and the other was a health care worker in Western Sydney.
The two other cases came from Iran with a man in his 30s who came back via Malaysia on 29 February and was isolated at the local hospitial.
The other case being a 40-year-old man from Launceston who came back on 29 February from a flight which left Melbourne and landed in Launceston on the same day.
He was treated at the Launceston General Hospital as he became the first Coronavirus case in Tasmania.On 3 March, eight more cases were confirmed in Australia, in Queensland there were two cases with one being an international student who travelled back from Dubai on 23 February before feeling unwell two days later.
The other was a 20-year-old man from China who was being treated at the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital.
NSW Health confirmed six new cases in the state in the age-ranges between 30s and 60s with only one case being in the country with it being a 51-year-old aged care worker at the Dorothy Henderson Lodge aged care nursing home in Macquarie Park run by BaptistCare.On 4 March, a second death was reported, a 95-year-old female dying at a Sydney aged-care facility.
She was one of six cases that was recorded in New South Wales with ages varying between 27 and 95 years old.
This was after an earlier positive case was reported at the Dorothy Henderson Lodge.
QLD Health recorded its eleventh confirmed case with a 26-year-old male from Logan arriving back from Iran on 26 February and had been unwell prior to travelling.
He presented to Princess Alexandra Hospital on 2 March where he was quarantined.
Three more cases appeared in Victoria and South Australia with two of the cases being from Iran with the other one recently travelled through Europe which included Italy.On 5 March, two new cases were reported in South Australia.
The 6th case in SA and the 52nd case in the country was an 8-month-old baby boy.
His mother was SA's 4th confirmed case.
They had travelled together from Iran.
The 7th case in SA and the 53rd case in the country was a 58-year-old male, identified as Brett Dean.
Dean is a composer and had recently travelled from Taiwan.
WA also recorded its third case, becoming the 54th case in the country.
A female in her 30s had recently travelled from Iceland and the UK via Dubai, arriving on 3 March and became symptomatic the following day.
She was stable and recovering in self-isolation at home.Also that same day, NSW Health announced three new cases, bringing the state total to 25 and the national total to 57.
They included a 94-year-old patient at Dorothy Henderson Lodge with no recent history of travel, a 52-year-old male who was a Goulburn resident that had travelled to Darwin and was tested after finding out he was a close contact of an earlier confirmed case, and a 16-year-old male year 11 student at Epping Boys High School in the north of Sydney.Later that day, Qld recorded two new cases, bringing the state total to 13.
An 81-year-old man who returned recently from Thailand was the 12th case and he remained in a stable condition in the Sunshine Coast University Hospital.
A 29-year-old woman from Brisbane, who recently travelled from London to Brisbane with a short stopover in Singapore, was identified as the 13th case.
She is now well and in isolation.
These cases became the 58th and 59th cases in the country, respectively.
On 6 March, Epping Boys High School was closed for one day, as per NSW Health advice, in an effort to trace contacts and contain the virus.
NSW Health also confirmed three new cases bringing the total to 28 in the state.
The 26th and 27th cases were a 24-year-old female and a 21-year-old male who were both staff members at Dorothy Henderson Lodge with no recent history of travel.
The 28th case was an 18-year-old female who was a close contact of another recently confirmed case in Western Sydney.
These cases became the 60th, 61st and 62nd cases in the country, respectively.
Qld also recorded its 14th case in the state and the 63rd in the country, a 28-year-old male who recently travelled from Iran and was taken to Princess Alexandra Hospital.On 7 March, Victorian Health Minister Jenny Mikakos confirmed during a press conference that a doctor in Victoria had tested positive for COVID-19, becoming the 11th case in the state.
The doctor in his 70s had returned to Australia from the United States on 29 February.
From 2 March to 6 March, the doctor had consulted approximately 70 patients at The Toorak Clinic in Melbourne and two patients at an aged-care facility.
The clinic was closed over the weekend and patients were contacted to self-isolate.
Health officials sought to notify passengers on the doctor's flights.
The doctor believed he only had a mild cold and was fit to return to work, hitting back at the minister for her comments.
He was the 64th case in the country.
On the same day, NSW Health confirmed a further six cases, taking the total to 34 in the state and 70 in the country.
The cases involved a male in his 20s, a male in his 40s, a male in his 50s, and two females in their 40s who were all family members or close contacts of an earlier confirmed case, and a male in his 70s who had travelled from Italy via Doha on 1 March.
Tasmania's Public Health department also recorded its second case in the state, the 71st case in the country.
A male Hobart resident in his 20s returned from Nepal via Singapore on 26 February and experienced cold-like symptoms the following day.
On 6 March he was asked to self-isolate by authorities whilst awaiting his test results.
He ignored this advice and attended his casual work shift on 7 March at the Hotel Grand Chancellor.
Shortly after, his results returned positive for the virus.Later that day, NSW Health announced a further two cases, the 35th and 36th cases in the state.
A male in his 60s who had recently travelled from Italy and a male in his 40s who had recently travelled from Sydney to Canberra and return.
The latter was a close contact of an earlier confirmed case.
These cases became the 72nd and 73rd cases in the country.
On 8 March, an 82-year-old man, who was NSW's 16th confirmed case, died.
He was the second death at the Dorothy Henderson Lodge aged-care facility and the third death in the country.
NSW confirmed two new cases, bringing its total to 38.
The 37th case was a female health care worker in her 30s at Ryde Hospital and was a contact of an earlier confirmed case at Dorothy Henderson Lodge.
The 38th case was a woman in her 50s who was a contact of an earlier confirmed case.
Two members of the Australian Defence Force (ADF) were also reported to have contracted COVID-19.
"The male officer, aged in his 40s, travelled on the 6:45am flight QF1509 from Sydney to Canberra to attend a meeting at the Defence Headquarters in Russell.
He then travelled on flight VA651 from Canberra to Sydney at 2:35pm."
He was previously announced as a confirmed case in NSW on 7 March and was not a new case for either NSW or the ACT.
He was also "a known close contact of a previously confirmed case."
While he had travelled to Canberra for a meeting on 28 February, the ACT Chief Health Officer declared the other case as unrelated.
This case was also not confirmed as a new case or as a case within the ACT.
The ADF was working with ACT and NSW Health authorities to investigate the two cases and their travel arrangements.Later that day, a 38-year-old woman became the 15th confirmed case in Qld.
She recently travelled from London via Dubai and was quarantined at the Sunshine Coast University Hospital.
She was the country's 76th case.
Victoria recorded its 12th case, the 77th case in the country.
A woman from Indonesia in her 50s flew from Jakarta to Perth on 27 February and became symptomatic on 29 February.
She then flew from Perth to Melbourne on 2 March on Virgin Airlines flight VA682.
She was recovering in home-isolation, cared for by family members.
WA reported its 4th case, the 78th case in the country.
A woman in her 70s who travelled from Cuba to Perth via London on 6 March.
She developed symptoms on 7 March, was tested in her home, then attended a West Australian Symphony Orchestra event, despite being required to self-isolate whilst awaiting the results.On 9 March, eight more cases were confirmed in NSW, bringing the state total to 46 and 86 in the country.
The 39th case in NSW was a male in his 70s with no recent history of travel.
He presented himself to St Vincent's Emergency Department on 6 March, was tested and on 7 March he returned a positive result.
The hospital was trying to contact any patients that may have been in contact with him.
The 40th case in NSW was a man in his 40s with a recent travel history.
The 41st and 42nd cases in NSW were a man and woman year 10 student at St Patrick's Marist College in Sydney's northwest.
The school closed for the following day.
The 43rd case in NSW was a year 7 student at Willoughby Girls High School.
The 44th and 45th cases in NSW were two men in their 50s who appeared to have a connection with previously confirmed cases.
The 46th case in NSW was the mother of the year 7 student.
This brought the national total to 86.
On the same day, Victoria reported three new cases, bringing the state total to 15 and the national total to 89.
The 13th case in the state was a man in his 50s who was on the same flight from the US as an earlier confirmed case, the GP of Toorak Clinic.
The 14th case in the state was a woman in her 20s who returned from Colorado in the US on 6 March.
The 15th case in the state was a woman in her 50s who returned from Tehran on 6 March.
These cases brought the national total to 89.
WA reported two new cases, bringing its total to 6, the national total to 91.
The first was a woman in her 60s, who supposedly contracted the virus from her husband.
He had recently returned from Iran although he had not tested positive at the time.
The second was a man in his 40s, who contracted the virus from his mother who had returned from Jakarta.
The mother spent 6 days in Perth, then travelled to Melbourne.On 10 March, NSW reported eight new cases, one of which was a Victorian native, a man in his 20s who has returned from Hong Kong.
This case is being counted as a NSW case by NSW, but is being treated as a Victorian case on the Australian Department of Health website.
The cases involve a woman in her 20s who was a known contact of a previous case from Ryde Hospital, a woman in her 40s who had returned from South Korea, the Victorian man in his 20s who had returned from Hong Kong, a woman in her 80s who was transferred from Dorothy Henderson Lodge to Ryde Hospital, a woman in her 40s who is related to a deceased resident of Dorothy Henderson Lodge, a woman in her 30s, a man in his 70s, and a woman in her 40s.
This brought the Victorian state total to 16, 54 in NSW and the national total to 100.
On the same day, the principal of Carey Baptist Grammar confirmed that one of the teachers at their Kew campus was infected with the virus.
This teacher, a woman in her 50s, was confirmed to be the partner of an individual who was on the same flight from the US that the GP of Toorak Clinic was on.
It was confirmed later in the day that she had visited the under 16 final between Boondara Cricket Club and Balwyn Cricket Club in Balwyn North on 8 March before she discovered she was infected.
As a result of the teacher's infection, the school was closed until 15 March.
This brought the state total to 17, and the national total to 101.
Queensland also confirmed 3 more cases, bringing the total to 18 and 104 cases in the country.
The three cases were a 42-year-old woman from Sunshine Coast, the partner of a 38-year-old woman with the virus who travelled from London through Dubai, a 46-year-old woman from Brisbane who had recently travelled to Austria and France, and a 22-year-old man from Brisbane who had recently travelled to Spain, France and Italy.Later that day, Victoria confirmed 2 new cases.
One was a man in his 70s who returned from Singapore to Melbourne on 6 March who had travelled to Jordan, Eygpt and Singapore, and had visited South Melbourne Market on 6 March and a function at The Albert Park Hotel on 7 March before he knew he was infected.
The other was a man in his 70s who returned from Los Angeles to Melbourne.
These are the 18th and 19th cases in Victoria and the 105th and 106th cases in the country.
NSW also announced 6 new cases, a woman in her 50s who arrived from the US, a man in his 60s who arrived from Switzerland, a man in his 50s who arrived from the US, a woman in her 60s who arrived from Italy and is linked to a previous close contact, a woman in her 30s who is related to a deceased relative from Dorothy Henderson Lodge, and a woman in her 40s.
This brings the number of cases in NSW to 60, and the national total to 112.
On 11 March, Victoria confirmed 3 new cases.
One was a man in his 50s who returned from Seattle to Melbourne on 7 March, who had attended the Mussel and Jazz festival at South Melbourne Market and a rugby game on 7 March, before he was diagnosed.
Another was a woman in her 20s who returned from the US.
Another case was a male teacher in his 50s who returned from the US, who works at Beth Rivkah College and taught for half a day on 9 March, before being diagnosed.
As a result, the school and its brother school Yeshivah College were closed for 24 hours.
Southern Cross University had also closed two of its campuses, its Lismore campus in NSW, and its Gold Coast campus in Queensland, after a visiting male staff member with the virus from the Philippines attended workshops at the campuses before returning to the Philippines on 8 March.
A spokesperson said that the 45 people in close contact with the man will be contacted.
This brought the number of cases in Victoria to 22, and the national total to 115
On the same day, Western Australia confirmed 3 new cases, two men and one woman who had separately flown back from Europe, the UK, and the US.
Two of the new cases flew back on 8 March and 9 March respectively.
This brought the number of cases in WA to 9 and the number of cases in the country to 118.
NSW also confirmed 4 new cases.
Three women in their 20s and 30s who returned from Italy together, and one man in his 70s who is a contact of a resident of Dorothy Henderson Lodge.
This brought the number of cases in NSW to 64, and the national total to 122.
Later that day, the head of the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA), David Walsh, cancelled the Dark Mofo winter arts festival.
In a statement, David Walsh stated "I know that [the cancellation] will murder an already massacred tourism environment, but I feel like I have no choice," he feels that "if we ran Dark and nobody came, I’d lose $5 million or more because I would have to cover the absent ticket revenue."
In a statement on the cancellation the chief executive of Tourism Industry Council Tasmania said that "Dark Mofo is our largest drawcard over the winter months and has a big positive impact on visitation across Tasmania in June.
[The cancellation] is going to severely impact our visitor economy over the depth of winter." and that they "will work with MONA and our tourism and event stakeholders, as well as the Hobart City Council, to identify opportunities to attract local and domestic visitors during this upcoming winter season,".
Victoria also confirmed another case, another teacher at Carey Baptist Grammar who shared an office with the other teacher at the school with the virus.
This brings the number of cases in Victoria up to 23, and the number of cases in the country up to 123.
SA also confirmed 2 new cases, two men, one in his 60s the other in his 70s.
One man went to Europe and the other man went to Southeast Asia.
This brings the number of cases in SA up to 9, and the number of cases in the country up to 125.
Queensland also confirmed 2 new cases, a 32-year-old woman who returned from USA to Gold Coast, and a 31-year-old man who had close contact with the aforementioned 32-year-old woman.
This brings the number of cases in Queensland up to 20, and the number of cases in the country up to 127.
Queensland Health is also calling for people who attended Friday's Riverside, a popular nightspot in Brisbane, on 6,7,8 or 9 March to come forward as a male student visited the nightspot between these dates.
They have also appealed for people who attended classes with the man at the University of Queensland to self isolate.
Tasmania also confirmed its 3rd case, 128th case in the country.
A woman in her 30s travelled from South America via New Zealand and then travelled from Sydney to Hobart on flight JQ727 on 8 March.
The woman visited University of Tasmania's Sandy Bay campus on 9 and 10 March, Morris Miller Library on 9 March, and visited Lazenby's café on 10 March.
The patient was taken to Royal Hobart Hospital.
HBF also cancelled the Run for a Reason fun run, a fun run that raises money for WA health charities because of the virus.On 12 March, Southern Cross University reopened its Lismore and Gold Coast campuses which were closed the previous day.
St Patrick Marist also reopened after being closed since 9 March but 196 student deemed to be close contacts were asked to stay home.
NSW announced a further 13 cases overnight, bringing the state total to 77 and the national total to 141.
The 65th case in the state was a 44-year-old man who had not travelled overseas.
The 66th case was a 19-year-old female health care worker at Ryde Hospital who is a close contact of another confirmed case.
The 67th case was a 62-year-old man who arrived on 10 March from Italy.
The 68th case was an 86-year-old man who had not travelled overseas.
The 69th case was a 14-year-old female who had not travelled.
The 70th case was a 26-year-old woman who had not travelled overseas.
The 71st case was a 56-year-old woman who arrived on 7 March from the UK via Dubai.
The 72nd case was 62-year-old woman who returned to NSW on 10 March from Italy who had contact with the 68th case.
The 73rd case was a 35-year-old woman who had not travelled.
The 74th case was a 53-year-old man.
The 75th case was a 23-year-old woman who arrived on 8 March from Malaysia, the 76th case was a 38-year-old woman and the 77th case was a 63-year-old man.
The ACT also announced its first case in the territory, the 142nd case in Australia.
A man in his 30s had not travelled overseas but did travel outside of the ACT.
The same day Queensland also confirmed seven new cases, bringing the state total to 21 and the national total to 149.
The 21st case in the state was a 19-year-old man from Brisbane who was a close contact of the Queensland's 18th case.
The 22nd case was a 37-year-old man who returned from Geneva via Abu Dhabi to Brisbane.
The 23rd case and 24th case was a 63-year-old man and his wife, a 64-year-old woman who had recently travelled to the US.
The 23rd and 24th cases were US actor Tom Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson, respectively.
The 25th case in the state was a 40-year-old man who returned from the UK to Brisbane.
The 26th case in the state was a 24-year-old man who returned from the US to Brisbane.
The 27th case in the state was a 56-year-old woman who returned from Indonesia to Brisbane.Later that day, a $17.6bn stimulus package was unveiled by the Prime Minister to "protect Australians' health, secure jobs and set the economy to bounce back" from the crisis.
Victoria confirmed a further four cases in the state, bringing the state total to 27 and the national total to 153.
All four cases were male with their ages ranging from 30 to 70 with a recent history of overseas travel.
SA confirmed three new cases, bringing the state total to 12 and the national total to 156.
The state's 10th case was a woman in her 40s, possibly being the state's first case of human-to-human transmission, who was diagnosed in a drive-through clinic.
The 11th and 12th cases were a man in his 60s and a woman in her 50s who had travelled extensively through Italy and Spain and arrived in Sydney on 9 March, before flying home to Adelaide on 10 March.
Westbourne Grammar School closed until at least 16 March while one student was tested.
West Australian health minister Roger Cook has informed the public that the Western Australian Department of health is postponing upgrades at Peel Health Campus to accommodate patients with the virus.
There were concerns that the upgrade would temporarily halve the ED waiting room capacity, preventing isolation of ED patients from patients with the virus.
The upgrade has been postponed to 1 October 2020.On 13 March, Katoomba High School was closed until at least 14 March after one person, believed to be a staff member, returned a positive test.
Queensland also confirmed four more cases bringing the state total to 31 and the national total to 160.
The organisers of Paniyiri Greek Festival cancelled the event due to concerns about the virus.
Tasmania confirmed a new case, a woman in her 40s isolated in her accommodation on the University of Tasmania's Newnham campus in Launceston.
This brought the number of cases in Tasmania to four and the national total to 161.
Western Australia confirmed 5 more cases, bringing the state total up to 14 and the national total up to 166.
Australian Submarine Corporation has shut down its Osborne facility in South Australia as one of the employees working there has tested positive for the virus.
It is unclear whether this was a new case or one of the 12 confirmed previously.
Victoria confirmed nine new cases, six of which were male and three of which were female, aged between 20 and 70.
Of these cases, seven had an international travel history.
One of these cases was the first case of human-to-human transmission in the state.
A McLaren Formula One team member tested positive for the virus.
It is unclear whether this is included in the Victorian statistics or not.
This brought the Victorian total to 36 and the national total to 175.
NSW also confirmed 14 new cases.
The 78th case was a 37-year-old woman.
The 79th was a 25-year-old woman who returned from the UK via Perth but was not infectious on the flight.
The 80th was a 41-year-old woman who was an aged care worker and also a contact of another confirmed case.
The 81st case was a 56-year-old man who was a relative of other returned cases and also recently returned from Italy.
The 82nd case was a 30-year-old man.
The 83rd case was a 38-year-old woman who travelled from the US but was not infectious on the flight.
The 84th case was a 47-year-old woman who travelled from the US and was a close contact of a previous case.
The 85th case was a 27-year-old man who travelled from Switzerland to Sydney via Dubai.
The 86th case was a 48-year-old woman who had not travelled overseas or had contact with other confirmed cases.
The 87th and 88th cases were a 34-year-old man and 34-year-old woman who returned from the Philippines together but weren't infectious on the flight.
The 89th case was a 50-year-old woman.
The 90th case was a 24-year-old man and the 91st case was a 44-year-old man.
This brought the state total to 91 and the national total to 189.
Later in the day, Queensland confirmed four new cases, bringing the state total to 35 and the national total to 193.
South Australia confirmed 4 new cases, including a man in his 60s from the US, a woman in her 50s from the US, a man in his 50s from Europe and a male student from Sacred Heart College's senior campus at Somerton Park.
Due to the student's infection, the school was set to close for cleaning on 14 and 15 March.
Two classes who had probably come into contact with the boy had been asked to quarantine themselves.
This brought the number of cases in SA to 16 and the national total to 197.
Peter Dutton the Home Affairs Minister for Australia was diagnosed in Queensland.
It was unclear whether this was already included in the Queensland statistics or not.
Tasmania confirmed a new case, a man in his 60's who travelled from North America and arrived in Tasmania on 10 March.
This brought the number of cases in Tasmania up to 5 and the number of cases in the country up to 198.
On 14 March, SA reported three new cases, bringing the state total to 19 and the national total to 201.
A woman in her 30s had travelled to the UK, a man in his 50s had travelled to the US and a woman in her 80s had both travelled overseas and had close contact with an earlier confirmed case.
WA confirmed 3 new cases, two men and one woman, all of whom travelled overseas.
This brought the state total to 17 and the national total to 204.
NSW confirmed 20 new cases.
The 92nd case was a 41-year-old woman.
The 93rd case was a 41-year-old man.
The 94th case was a 64-year-old woman who has arrived from Germany.
The 95th case was a 32-year-old woman.
The 96th case was a 24-year-old woman.
The 97th case was a 55-year-old woman.
The 98th case a 30-year-old man.
The 99th case 68-year-old man who has arrived from Italy.
The 100th case 30-year-old man.
The 101st case was a 67-year-old woman.
The 102nd case was a 39-year-old man.
The 103rd case was a 31-year-old woman who has travelled from Finland and the UK.
The 104th case was a 69-year-old man who travelled from Italy.
The 105th case was a 66-year-old woman who travelled from Italy.
The 106th case was a 26-year-old man.
The 107th case was a 42-year-old man.
The 108th case was a 43-year-old man who recently travelled to France and is also a UK confirmed case.
The 109th case was a 32-year-old man.
The 110th case was a 38-year-old woman, and the 111th case was a 67-year-old man who arrived from the US and was likely infected overseas.
This brought the state total to 111 and the national total to 224.
Later that day, Victoria also confirmed 13 new cases, bringing the state total to 49 and the national total to 237.
They included 11 men and two women aged between 20 and 69.
One case was admitted to hospital while the others were in home isolation.
All 13 cases were acquired overseas or through close contact with earlier confirmed cases.
Queensland also confirmed a further 11 cases, bringing the state total to 46 and the national total to 248.
The majority of these cases had travelled overseas or had exposure to an earlier confirmed case.
Victoria are suspending all jury trials to limit the spread of the virus.
On 15 March, Tasmania reported its sixth case bringing the national total to 249.
A female in her 60s was a close contact of an earlier confirmed case with overseas travel.
Victoria reported eight new cases, bringing the state total to 57 and the national total to 257.
They included six males and two females aged from their teens to 60s, with most cases recently returning from overseas.
One case is linked to Carey Baptist Grammar School, where a teacher had earlier tested positive.
NSW reported 22 new cases, bringing the state total to 133 and the national total to 279.
Four of the cases had travelled from the US.
Authorities were not able to work out the source of 10 of the new cases.
Queensland reported 15 new cases, including 9 women and 6 men, bringing the state total to 61 and national total to 294.
SA reported one new case, a woman in her 60s who has returned from the US.
This brought the number of cases in SA to 20 and the number of cases in the country up to 295.
Later that day, NSW Health confirmed the deaths of two further confirmed cases in the country.
The fourth death was a 77-year-old female from Brisbane who had died on 13 March in a Sydney hospital and testing confirmed a positive result for COVID-19.
She was Queensland's 62nd case and the 296th case in the country.
The fifth death was a 90-year-old female resident of Dorothy Henderson Lodge who died on 15 March and testing confirmed a positive result for COVID-19.
She was the 134th case in NSW and the 297th case in the country.
Loreto Mandeville Hall has closed for at least a day on 16 March after a parent of a secondary student was infected.
Richard Wilkins, a Channel 9 Entertainment Editor and Weekend Today host, has been infected.Western Australia confirmed a new case, this brought the number of cases in WA to 18 and the number of cases in the country up to 298.
Tasmania confirmed a new case, a woman in her 50s.
This brought the number of cases in Tasmania to 7 and the number of cases in the country up to 299.
Carey Baptist Grammar will stay closed until 20 March, and Yeshivah–Beth Rivkah will stay closed until 23 March.On 16 March, ACT reported a new case, a man in his 30s, bringing the total in the ACT to 2.
Victoria reported 14 new cases, bringing the state total to 71.
NSW reported 36 new cases, bringing the state total to 170.
Queensland reported 6 new cases, bringing the state total  to 68.
SA reported 9 new cases, bringing the state total to 29.
WA reported 10 new cases, bringing the state total to 28.
SA reported another case, this brought the number of cases in SA to 30.
Nationally, the total number of cases rose to 376.
The University of Queensland has stopped all teaching for the week after three students tested positive for the virus, they will be closed until at least 20 March.
Western Australia introduced similar measures as New South Wales, preventing schools from organising gatherings of over 500, including "...swimming and sports carnivals, interschool carnivals, performances, concerts, exhibitions, fetes and fairs."
Scotch College in SA has closed due to a confirmed case on Friday, a male student.
The bio-cleaning will happen on 17 March, with the school to reopen in the following days.
Unley High School also closed after a female student contracted the virus.
The school will be closed on 17 March.
Susan McDonald, a Queensland senator, has been infected with the virus.On 17 March, Victoria reported 23 new cases, bringing the state total to 94.
Toorak Primary school in Victoria closed after a teacher tested positive, it will remain closed for at least 24 hours.
Queensland reported 10 new cases, bringing the state total to 78.
WA reported three new cases, bringing the state total to 31.
NSW reported 40 new cases, bringing the state total to 210.
NSW Liberal senator, Andrew Bragg, was the third Australian politician to test positive.
SA reported two new cases, both in returned travellers, which brought the state total to 32.
Nationally, the total number of cases rose by 78 to 454.
A total of 5 people have died and 23 people have recovered.On 18 March, ACT reported one new case, bringing its total to 3; WA had four new cases, bringing its total to 35; Qld had 16 new cases, bringing its total to 94; NSW had 57 new cases, bringing its total to 267; Victoria had 27 new cases, bringing its total to 121; only two of which were from community transmissions; SA had five new cases, bringing its total to 37; and TAS had three new cases, bringing its total to 10.
Nationally, the total number of cases rose by 113 to 567.
A total of 6 people have died and 43 people have recovered.
The cruse ship Ruby Princess discharged 2,700 passengers in Sydney on 19 March 2020.
It was announced on 20 March 2020 that three of 13 passengers have tested positive for the coronavirus.
New South Wales health authorities have asked all passengers to go into self-isolation.On 22 March, the Prime Minister announced a second stimulus package worth A$66bn, the total financial package offered by the government and Reserve Bank now amounts to A$189bn.
He stated that the financial support will be offered to individuals most vulnerable to the effects of the outbreak.
The package includes doubling income support for those on Jobseeker's allowance while waiving asset tests and waiting periods.
A$100,000 grants would also be provided to small and medium-sized businesses.
ANyone effected by the coronavirus will have access to up to A$10,000 of their pension during 2019-2020 and could take an additional A$10,000 the following year.
Meanwhile, Australian airports and airlines will be granted support of up to A$715 million.
On 1 February 2020, Australia banned the entry of foreign nationals from mainland China, and ordered its own returning citizens from China to self-quarantine for 14 days.
On 1 March, Australia subsequently imposed a travel ban on Iran, South Korea (5 March), and finally Italy (11 March).On 13 March, at a meeting of the Council of Australian Governments, the formation of a national crisis cabinet was proclaimed for the first time since World War II.
The crisis cabinet will meet weekly and consists of the Premiers and chief ministers of the Australian states and territories.
This is the only time in Australian history that a crisis cabinet has included state and territory leaders.
At its meeting on 13 March, the crisis cabinet announced that gatherings of more than 500 people should be cancelled from 15 March, amid fears about the spread of coronavirus.
Schools, universities, workplaces, public transport and airports are not included in this recommendation.On 15 March, Morrison announced that from midnight, all travellers arriving in or returning to Australia must self-isolate for 14 days, mirroring a similar requirement imposed by New Zealand.
Failure to comply would result in a fine of $11,000 to $50,000 and jail time depending on the state.
Cruise ships were also be barred from docking in the country for 30 days.On 19 March, Morrison announced that Australia would be closing its borders to all non-residents and non-Australian citizens from 9pm on 20 March.
The Australian Government had imposed the ban in coordination with New Zealand, which imposed a ban on most non-residents and non-citizens from midnight on 19 March.On 22 March, Morrison announced a closure of places of social gathering, including registered and licensed clubs, licensed premises in hotels and bars, entertainment venues, including but not restricted to movie theatres, casinos and nightclubs and places of worship.
Cafes and restaurants are to remain open, but limited to takeaway only.
Similarly, enclosed spaces for funerals and things of that nature will have to follow the strict four square metre rule.
These measures are effective immediately at midday, 23 March.
He stated that he would like the schools to remain open but parents could keep children at home if they wished to.
Queensland was the first to declare a public health emergency on 29 January 2020.
The legislation was strengthened when parliament passed the Public Health (Declared Public Health Emergencies) Amendment Bill 2020 on 6 February.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian formed a war cabinet to make decisions in relation to the pandemic.
Members include herself, Treasurer Dominic Perrottet, Minister for Health and Medical Research Brad Hazzard and Minister for Police and Emergency Services David Elliott.On 15 March, Secretary of the NSW Department of Education, Mark Scott ordered that, effective immediately, NSW schools introduce social distancing measures to reduce the spread of coronavirus.
The order requires schools to cancel all assemblies, excursions, travel, concerts, large inter-school sporting and arts events, and other events that would require students and staff to congregate in large numbers.
Schools will continue to stay open.
Four schools in the state have been shut for periods during the crisis due to confirmed cases within their school communities.On 16 March, NSW Minister for Health and Medical Research Brad Hazzard announced that he was using his powers under Section 7 of the Public Health Act 2010 to immediately and indefinitely cancel all public events with more than 500 attendees.
The order is enforceable by NSW Police and violations of the order carry a prison term of six months and/or an $11,000 fine.Chief Justice Bathurst, Chief Justice of New South Wales, and Chief Judge Price of the District Court of New South Wales ordered that effective 16 March 2020, new jury trials would be suspended to limit the spread of coronavirus.
The order does not apply to already empanelled jury trials.
Corrective Services New South Wales implemented screening mechanisms, early flu vaccination programs and stricter hygiene requirements for staff, visitors and inmates to slow the spread of the virus.The University of Sydney has cancelled all graduations, conferences, academic events and student organised events.
The University of New South Wales announced that it was cancelling all student and academic events until Easter, encourage staff to work from home and, where possible, shift all lectures, tutorials, demonstrations and labs to online learning.NSW schools have been told by the NSW Department of Education Secretary Mark Scott, to cancel all assemblies, excursions, travel and some events and conferences including arts and initiative events, as well as whole school sporting events and inter-school sporting events with three or more involved schools.Even though there was a ban on gatherings of more than 500 people, huge crowds flocked to the popular Bondi beach and other beaches across Sydney on Friday 20 March.
Health Minister Greg Hunt said that such behaviour was "unacceptable" while the NSW Labor's Shadow Treasurer, Walt Secord urged the government to completely close off the beach.
NSW Police Minister David Elliott later stated in a televised interview that lifeguards were instructed to keep a head count of the people at the beach and if the number exceeded 500, the beach will be closed.
On 21 March, crowds built up yet again which led the local council to temporarily close Bondi and the other beaches of Bronte and Tamarama.
On 10 March, Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews warned Victorians to expect "extreme measures" in the wake of the federal government updating the travel advice for Italy.
These could include cancelling major sporting events, requiring entire economic sectors to work from home, and calling recently retired health professionals to return to work.On 16 March, Andrews and Minister for Health Jenny Mikakos declared a state of emergency for Victoria for at least four weeks.Geelong Grammar School in Victoria ended the school term on 18 March rather than 27 March, to preemptively stop the spread before any cases were discovered.Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews announced on 22 March that the state will bring the school holiday forwards to 24 March, from 27 March.
Scotch Oakburn College in Tasmania closed as a preemptive decision in fear of rising SARS-CoV-2 cases.
It will be closed from 16 March until at least 30 March.On 17 March, Tasmania declared a public health emergency.
On 19 March, Premier Peter Gutwein announced that all "non-essential" travellers to the state, including returning residents, would be subject to a mandatory 14-day quarantine.
On 15 March, Premier Mark McGowan declared a state of emergency in Western Australia, along with a formal public health emergency.
Schools were prevented from organising gatherings of over 500, including "...swimming and sports carnivals, interschool carnivals, performances, concerts, exhibitions, fetes and fairs."
On 22 March, the WA government announced that the state's borders would be closed from Tuesday 24 March in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus and all interstate arrivals will be required to self-isolate for 14 days.
On 15 March, a public health emergency was declared in South Australia.
On 22 March, a "major emergency" was declared, giving the police power to enforce self-isolation rules.
Premier Steven Marshall also announced that the state's borders would be closed from 4pm Tuesday 24 March in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus.
People arriving into the state will be required to sign a declaration that they will self-isolate for 14 days and provide an address to the police, with penalties for failure to comply.
On 16 March, the ACT government declared a public health emergency.
It has also planned to cancel all visits to the Alexander Maconochie prison from 23 March.
ACT Corrective Services Commissioner Jon Peach stated that as a result there would be "increased access to telephones" for prisoners to keep in touch with their families.
The NT government is set to introduce strict border control on 24 March.
Chief Minister Michael Gunner announced on 21 March that anyone arriving from abroad or interstate will be required to self-isolate for a period of 14 days.
The only exemption to this requirement would be due to health and emergency services, defense & policing, flight crews & freight and based on "compassionate grounds".
NT Police Commissioner Jamie Chalker said that the local police and government are likely to impose these measures until September.
Anyone now arriving in NT will have to declare that they would isolate for 14 days and let the authorities know of their location during this period at the point of entry.
Failure to comply with the new regulations could result in denying entry or a fine of AU$62,800.
Furthermore, all non-essential travel to NT's 76 remote communities is currently banned.
The World Surf League cancelled all events in March 2020.
All Anzac Day marches were cancelled.
The 15 May School Strike for Climate rally and march was cancelled.
The Australian Border Force suspends all deportations to New Zealand between 16 and 30 March 2020.
NAPLAN exams for 2020 were cancelled on 20 March.
The Sydney Royal Easter Show, the largest ticketed event in Australia, was cancelled only for the third time in its 197-year history.
Vivid Sydney was cancelled for the first time in its history.
The Sydney Writers' Festival suspended ticket sales and are expected to cancel their seasons.
The Festival of Dangerous Ideas was cancelled on 16 March.
The Byron Bay Bluesfest announced that it would be cancelled due to the introduction of 14-day self-isolation for anyone entering Australia.
The Hunter Valley Steamfest was cancelled.
Splendour in the Grass was postponed from July 2020 until 23–25 October 2020.
The Sydney Film Festival was cancelled on 18 March.
On 11 March the head of the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA), David Walsh, cancelled the Dark Mofo winter arts festival.
He announced on 16 March that the museum itself would be closed indefinitely.
South Australian National Football League men's and women's games will not be held in front of a crowd from 14 March
Basketball South Australia decided jointly with the National Basketball league to postpone NBL1 Central games till at least 18 April 2020.
Rowing South Australia has cancelled the South Australian portion of Head of the River.
The 2020 Melbourne International Comedy Festival (scheduled for 25 March – 19 April 2020) will not go ahead.
The 2020 Stawell Gift has been postponed until later in the year.
On 3 March, the Reserve Bank of Australia became the first central bank to cut interest rates in response to the outbreak.
Official interest rates were cut by 0.25% (25 base points) to a record low of 0.5%.On 12 March, the Government announced a A$17.6 billion stimulus package, the first since the 2008 GFC.
The package consists of multiple parts, a one-off A$750 payment to around 6.5 million welfare recipients as early as 31 March 2020, small buisness assistance with 700,000 grants up to $25,000 and a 50 percent wage subsidy for 120,000 apprenticies or trainees for up to 9 months, 1 billion to support economically impacted sectors, regions and communities, and $700 million to increase tax write off and $3.2 billion to support short-term small and medium sized buisness investment.On 19 March, the Reserve Bank again cut interest rates by a further 0.25% to 0.25%, the lowest in Australian history.In March 2020, the Australian Bureau of Statistics began releasing a number of additional statistical products to assess the economic impacts on the outbreak on the Australian economy.
Data on retail trade turnover indicated a 0.4 per cent rise in turnover in February 2020.
Negative effects on some areas of the retail sector (particularly tourism-dependent businesses) were offset by a rise in food retail turnover, with supermarkets showing a large rise in sales, mainly arising from panic buying.
On 22 March, the government announced a second stimulus package of A$66bn, increasing the amount of total financial package offered to A$189bn.
This included several new measures like doubling income support for individuals on Jobseeker's allowance, granting A$100,000 to small and medium-sized businesses and A$715 million to Australian airports and airlines.
It also allowed individuals affected by the outbreak to access up to A$10,000 of their pension during 2019-2020 and also being able to take an additional same amount for the next year.
The major sporting leagues (AFL, AFL Women's, and the National Rugby League) stated that the seasons would not be suspended but continue behind closed doors.
The AFL season was curtailed to a maximum of 17 games, with clubs expected to take at least a 10% revenue hit from coronavirus related issues.
Australian Football players were noted for adjusting their after-goal celebrations to avoid high-fives and other forms of hand-to-hand contact.
The 2020 NBL Finals followed suit beginning with game two, although it was stated that they would be immediately suspended if any participants were to be diagnosed.
The best of five series was subsequently cancelled after the third game was played.
The remaining two One Day Internationals between Australia and New Zealand were cancelled after the first match was played behind closed doors.
Cricket Australia also cancelled the Australian women's cricket team's tour of South Africa due to the virus.
The first sporting event in Australia to be affected was the 2020 Australian Grand Prix, which was cancelled on 13 March after McLaren withdrew when a team member tested positive for COVID-19.
This was also enforced on the support races which included the 2020 Melbourne 400, which was the second round of the 2020 Supercars Championship to be cancelled.
Following the implementation of travel restrictions by New Zealand, the Australian Rugby League Commission (ARLC) announced that the New Zealand Warriors would be based in Australia for the foreseeable future.
Chairman of the ARLC Peter V'landys requested a government bailout for the National Rugby League, a request that was struck down, and caused a considerable negative reaction.
The 2020 Super Rugby season was suspended following the conclusion of play on 15 March, due to the outbreak and the imposition of mandatory quarantine for international travellers to New Zealand.
The A-League also annouced a continuation of the league with the Wellington Phoenix being based in Australia.
As of 22 March 2020 9:00 p.m.
AEDT, there were 1352 confirmed cases of coronavirus (COVID-19) in Australia:
532 in New South Wales (including a NSW resident who was diagnosed in Darwin but excluding a Victorian resident who was diagnosed in NSW)
296 in Victoria (The figures include 3 people infected on the Diamond Princess and a Victorian resident who was diagnosed in NSW.)
259 in Queensland (including 3 from the Diamond Princess)
120 in Western Australia (including 2 from the Diamond Princess)
100 in South Australia (including 1 from the Diamond Princess)
22 in Tasmania (including 5 from the Ruby Princess cruise ship docked in Sydney)
19 in the Australian Capital Territory
4 in the Northern Territory(including 2 from the Ruby Princess)
Seven people linked to COVID-19 have died:
1 March: the first death from COVID-19 was a 78-year-old Perth man, one of the passengers from the Diamond Princess who was being treated in Western Australia.
4 March: the second death was a 95-year-old woman who died at the Dorothy Henderson Lodge aged-care facility in Sydney.
8 March: the third death was an 82-year-old man, the second death at Dorothy Henderson Lodge in Sydney.
13 March: the fourth death was a 77-year-old Brisbane woman who developed symptoms on a flight to Sydney and died the same day.
15 March: the fifth death was a 90-year-old woman, the third death at Dorothy Henderson Lodge in Sydney.
18 March: the sixth death was an 86-year-old man being treated in a Sydney hospital.
20 March: the seventh death was an 81-year-old woman who had close contact with another confirmed case of COVID-19 at Ryde Hospital, Sydney.
The numbers of cases in the tables below refer to the number at the end of each day (11:59 pm).
Note: the figures include 10 cases related to the Diamond Princess.
The number repatriated from the ship are included in the state totals as follows: Qld (3), Vic (4), SA (1), WA (2, one of whom died on 1 March).
Press Conference by the Prime Minister of Australia on 27 February 2020 Transcript of the Press Conference held on 27 February 2020 by The Hon Scott Morrison MP, the Prime Minister of Australia, from Australian Parliament House alongside Dr Paul Kelly, Deputy Chief Medical Officer and The Hon.
Greg Hunt MP, Minister For Health, announcing the activation of the Australian Health Sector Emergency Response Plan for Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19).
Australian Health Sector Emergency Response Plan for Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) The Australian Health Sector Emergency Response Plan for Novel Coronavirus (the COVID-19 Plan) guides the Australian health sector response.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) health alert by the Australian Government Department of Health
Q&A on coronaviruses (COVID-19) by the World Health Organization
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation reports by the World Health Organization (official numbers of confirmed cases by country)
Map of global confirmed coronavirus COVID-19 cases and historical data in near real-time by the Johns Hopkins University
COVID-19 Epidemiologic and genetic data from the Wolfram data repository.
2019-nCoV Data Portal by Virus Pathogen Resource
Coronatracker – Coronavirus news aggregator and tracking portal
2020 coronavirus pandemic on cruise ships
Passengers and crew who travelled on several cruise ships during the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic were found to be infected with the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus that caused the pandemic.
Although most ships involved did not have substantial spread of the disease, on the British-registered Diamond Princess, there was substantial spread of the virus amongst the passengers and crew.
The ship was quarantined in February 2020 for nearly a month with about 3,700 passengers and crew on board; around 700 people were infected in the incident, and seven died.
The crisis management team of the German federal government said on 4 March 2020, following several actual and suspected outbreaks on cruise ships, "The Federal Foreign Office has included in its travel advice that there is an increased risk of quarantine on cruise ships."
On 11 March 2020, Viking Cruises suspended operations for its 79-vessel fleet until the end of April, cancelling all ocean and river cruises, after it was revealed that a passenger on a cruise in Cambodia had been exposed to the virus while in transit via plane, placing at least 28 other passengers in quarantine.
Similarly, on 12 March, Princess Cruises, owner of virus-stricken ships Diamond Princess and Grand Princess, suspended operations for all future cruises on its 18-ship fleet for 60 days.
The Federal Transport Minister of Canada announced on 13 March that ships carrying more than 500 people cannot dock in Canada through 1 July 2020.
Diamond Princess is a cruise ship registered in Britain owned and operated by Princess Cruises (incorporated in Bermuda and with headquarters in Santa Clarita, California, US), a brand of Carnival Corporation & plc.
SARS-CoV-2 was confirmed on 4 February 2020 to have spread within Diamond Princess during cruise M003, which had departed on 20 January 2020 from Yokohama (in Tokyo Bay near Tokyo) for a round trip.
By the time passengers disembarked into quarantine, the number of confirmed cases on the ship was more than in most countries.
On 20 January 2020, an 80-year-old passenger from Hong Kong, China, embarked in Yokohama, and disembarked in Hong Kong on 25 January.
On 1 February, six days after leaving the ship, he visited a Hong Kong hospital, where he tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
The ship was due to depart Yokohama for its next cruise on 4 February, but announced a delay the same day to allow Japanese authorities to screen and test passengers and crew still on board.
On 4 February, the authorities announced positive test results for SARS-CoV-2 for ten people on board, the cancellation of the cruise, and that the ship was entering quarantine.A total of 3,700 passengers and crew were quarantined by the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare for what was expected to be a 14-day period, off the Port of Yokohama.
On 7 February, the total number of people on board with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections grew to 61.
Another 3 cases were detected on 8 February, bringing the total to 64.
On 9 February 6 cases were detected, while another 65 were detected on 10 February, bringing the total to 135.On 11 February, 39 more people tested positive for the virus, including one quarantine officer, bringing the total to 174.
Passengers with confirmed cases were reported to be taken ashore for treatment.
On 13 February, 44 more people tested positive for the virus, bringing the total to 218.
On 15 February 67 more people were reported to be infected, bringing the total to 285.
On 16 February 70 more people were reported to be infected, bringing the total to 355.
The next day on 17 February, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare confirmed 99 more cases, raising the total to 454, 33 of whom were crew members; on 18 February, another 88 cases were confirmed, bringing the total to 542.Kentaro Iwata, an infectious diseases expert at Kobe University who visited the ship, strongly criticised the management of the situation in two widely circulated YouTube videos published on 18 February.
He called Diamond Princess a "COVID-19 mill".
He said that the areas possibly contaminated by the virus were not in any way separated from virus-free areas, there were numerous lapses in infection control measures, and that there was no professional in charge of infection prevention—the bureaucrats were in charge of everything.
Japanese officials denied the accusations.
While the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention commended the efforts to institute quarantine measures, their assessment was that it may have not been sufficient to prevent transmission among people on the ship.
Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said that the quarantine process had failed.
A day later, Yoshihiro Takayama, an acquaintance of Iwata and a doctor working on Diamond Princess, pointed out what he described as errors in Iwata's description of the situation in a Facebook post that went viral.
The next day on 20 February, Iwata removed his videos and apologised to those involved, but still insisted the situation on the ship had been chaotic.A preliminary report based on the first 184 cases by Japan's National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID) estimated that most of the transmission on the ship had occurred before the quarantine.
The cruise line, Princess Cruises had first assumed there was only minimal risk and had initiated only the lowest-level protocols for outbreaks before the quarantine.
By 27 February, at least 150 of the crew members had tested positive for the virus.
Dr. Norio Ohmagari, top government adviser and director of Japan's Disease Control and Prevention Center admitted that the quarantine process might not have been perfect.
A crew member reported that many of the crew had been expected to still work and interact with passengers even under the quarantine.
Princess Cruises stated that Japan's ministry of health was the lead authority defining and executing quarantine protocols, yet Japan's ministry of foreign affairs stated that a criteria of behavior was presented but the ultimate responsibility for safe environment rested with the ship operator.By 1 March, all passengers and crew members had disembarked from the ship.
On 8 March, an Indonesian, one of the former crew member of Diamond Princess had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 during the mandatory quarantine period in Indonesia.
Two passengers died on 20 February and a third on 23 February, all three Japanese citizens in their 80s.
A fourth passenger, an elderly Japanese man, was reported on 25 February to have died.
The fifth fatality, a British national in his 70s, died on 28 February.
A 78-year-old Australian national, who was evacuated from the ship, died on 1 March in Australia, making him the sixth.
A Hong Kong national from the ship died on 6 March, making him the seventh.
A Canadian man in his 70s died on 21 March, making him the eighth coronavirus-related death from the ship.
Cruise ship World Dream (registered in the Bahamas, operated by Dream Cruises) was on a journey from Nansha Port, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China to Nha Trang and Da Nang in Vietnam during 19-24 January 2020 with 6903 person on board including 108 from Hubei, in which 28 were from Wuhan.On 24 January 2020, the ship returned to the Nansha Port.
Port customs performed temperature check for all disembarking passengers and crew, with 31 people sampled and tested for the virus, including those who had fever during the cruise and those who were in close contact with confirmed cases before they broad the cruise.
All the test results were negative despite some of them were later confirmed to be infected.Between 24 January 2020 and 2 February 2020, the ship had made three additional cruises out of Guangzhou or Hong Kong, including two "cruises to nowhere" and one to the Philippines, although passengers from the journey were not disembarked at Manila due to local resident protests over fear on the virus.
On 2 February 2020, the ship departed from Hong Kong for Taiwan with around 3,800 persons on board.
On the same night, the cruise company was notified that there were confirmed cases from the ship's former passengers.
On the next day, the Guangdong government officially announced that three former passengers from the Vietnam journey had been confirmed infected by the novel coronavirus after they were disembarked.
Former passengers from the cruise in China were told to contact local health authority and observer quarantine.As of 11 February 2020, 12 cases associated with the cruise were confirmed, including 1 ground worker who had temporarily worked on the ship, and 4 relatives of passengers.
After the Guangdong government official announcement of confirmed cases among former passengers, on 4 February 2020, Taiwan blocked the ship's port of call in Kaohsiung due to concern on the virus.
On 5 February 2020, World Dream returned to Hong Kong and all 3,800 passengers and crew on board the ship at the time were put under quarantine at Kai Tak Cruise Terminal.
The quarantine was lifted on 9 February 2020 after all 1,800 crew members tested negative for the virus.
The majority of the passengers were not tested as they had had no contact with the infected Chinese passengers who had been on the ship during 19–24 January.
In February 2020, Netherlands' ship MS Westerdam, departing after a stop in Hong Kong on 1 February, was not allowed to call in the Philippines, Japan, and Guam over concerns regarding coronavirus infections.
After initially receiving approval on 10 February to let the passengers disembark in Thailand, as the ship was heading to Laem Chabang port near Bangkok, permission to dock was refused the next day.
However, the ship was still maintaining its course to Bangkok and at around 10:30 am CET on 11 February, Westerdam sailed around the southern tip of Vietnam.
According to Flip Knibbe, a Dutch passenger on the ship, all the passengers had their temperatures checked a second time.
Speaking to NOS on 11 February, Knibbe said "Dit schip is virusvrij": 'This ship is virus-free'.
Unlike Diamond Princess, those on board were not in quarantine.
Everyone could move freely, shops and restaurants were open and the entertainment programme continued.After Westerdam was refused at several points of call, on 13 February, the ship was allowed to dock in Sihanoukville, Cambodia.
At this point, only the 20 passengers who reported feeling ill were tested, and all of them tested negative.On 15 February, Malaysia reported that an 83-year-old US citizen who disembarked from Westerdam and flew into Malaysia on 14 February had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
In a second test, requested by both the Holland America Line and Cambodian authorities the woman tested positive again.
Despite these findings, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen visited the ship, discouraged use of masks, and encouraged the passengers to tour the city, sparking concerns that another spoke was being added to the contagion network.
Further cruise passengers were denied entry to Malaysia from Cambodia as a result.
On 22 February, after treatment with antiviral medications that were speculated to have an effect against COVID-19, the woman's medical condition improved and she was tested negative for SARS-CoV-2.
The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) initially stated that the woman had never been infected by SARS-CoV-2, but withdrew the claim, clarifying that the CDC "[has] no visibility on whether the initial test of the woman was anything other than positive".
Due to possible background politics, it is uncertain whether these results were a false negative, or whether the passenger cleared the virus from her system after 72 hours of intensive treatment.
Public health officials from Placer County, California reported that an elderly resident with underlying health conditions who had died on 4 March 2020 had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 after returning from a cruise from San Francisco to Mexico and back on Grand Princess between 11 and 21 February.
This marked the first death in California attributable to the virus.
The source of the new case's infection appeared to be the same as that of a resident of Sonoma County who tested positive on 2 March and who was also aboard Grand Princess on the same dates.Consequently, Princess Cruises, the owner and operator of Grand Princess, working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the government of California, and public health officials in San Francisco, terminated a port call in Ensenada, Mexico planned for 5 March and ordered the ship to return to San Francisco over concerns about the potential for an outbreak on board.After Grand Princess docked in San Francisco on 21 February, 62 passengers who had been on the previous cruise to Mexico reboarded the ship as it set sail for Hawaii, making stops at Kauai, Oahu, Maui, and Hilo (on the Big Island) between 26 and 29 February.
These passengers, who may have made been exposed to the same environment as were the Placer or Sonoma County cases during the previous cruise, were quarantined in their own on-board staterooms on 4 March by order of the CDC.
In addition, eleven passengers and ten crew members were exhibiting potential symptoms, and Grand Princess was ordered by the government of California to remain offshore while the California National Guard's 129th Rescue Wing airlifted test kits by helicopter to the ship.On 5 March, Princess Cruises confirmed that there were 3,533 people on board the ship—2,422 passengers and 1,111 crew members—representing 54 nationalities in total.On 6 March, U.S. Vice President Mike Pence announced that of the 46 tests run on selected passengers and crew members on Grand Princess, 19 crew members and two passengers had tested positive, 24 had tested negative, and one test was inconclusive.
Pence announced at a White House Coronavirus Task Force briefing that the ship would be brought to a non-commercial port, and that everyone on the ship would be tested and quarantined as necessary.
On 6 March, President Trump said that, despite what experts told him about limiting the spread of COVID-19, he wanted those on board Grand Princess to stay on the ship so that they would not be counted as American cases, which would otherwise "double because of one ship that wasn't our fault."On 7 March, Princess Cruises confirmed that Grand Princess was still at sea roughly 50 miles (80 km) from San Francisco, and that it was scheduled to dock in Oakland on 9 March, with its passengers to be transferred to facilities on land while the crew would be quarantined and treated on board.
The United States Coast Guard had airlifted supplies, including personal protective equipment, to the ship, and had medivacked a critically ill passenger and his travel companion for treatment unrelated to COVID-19.On 9 March, the ship docked at the Port of Oakland and passengers started disembarking.
More than 3,000 people on board were to be quarantined, with passengers at land facilities and the crew on board.
As of 22:00, 407 people had disembarked.Princess Cruises confirmed on 10 March that 1,406 people had disembarked from Grand Princess, increasing to 2,042 on 12 March.
California: The Sonoma County Department of Health confirmed that a former passenger of Grand Princess, on the cruise from San Francisco to Mexico, was a (presumptive) case.
California: Placer County officials confirmed that a former passenger of Grand Princess, also on the cruise from San Francisco to Mexico, was a (presumptive) case.
Officials confirmed the next day that the passenger had died.
Canada:
Alberta: Alberta reported its first presumptive case, a woman in her 50s who lives in the Calgary area, was on board Grand Princess and returned to Alberta on 21 February.
United States:
California:
Placer County: Officials reported an additional three presumptive positive cases, with all three having travelled on the same cruise on the same dates.
Sonoma County: Health officials announced another positive presumptive case who was a passenger on the same cruise between 11 and 21 February.
Sunnyvale: Department of Public Safety officers reported that they performed CPR on an unconscious 72-year-old patient who was not breathing, but were ultimately unsuccessful in reviving him.
After the man died, a family member informed officials that the victim had been a passenger on Grand Princess with two other people currently suspected of being infected.
Nevada: The Washoe County Health District announced that a presumptive positive patient, a male in his 50s, has been linked to Grand Princess.
He self-isolated at home.
An elementary school in Reno was closed because one of the man's family members is a student there.
Canada:
Ontario: Health officials confirmed that two new cases, a married man and woman in their 60s, were aboard Grand Princess from 11–21 February and returned to Canada on 28 February.
United States:
California:
Alameda County: Officials confirmed that a former passenger of Grand Princess, an older patient with underlying health problems, has tested positive.
The former passenger was on the ship during the trip to Mexico from 11–21 February 2020.
The patient was hospitalised and family members were quarantined.
Contra Costa County: Health officials announced that two new cases have been identified, with both having travelled on the same cruise on the same dates.
Marin County: The health department announced that two Marin County residents that were on the cruise and displayed symptoms have also been tested, but Governor Gavin Newsom has prioritised the testing of the passengers currently aboard Grand Princess, and all the tests are going through the same lab.
Hawaii: Governor David Ige announced the state's first case, a male Oahu resident who was a passenger on Grand Princess.
Although the ship stopped in Hawaii in late February, the man disembarked Grand Princess in Mexico earlier in February (before it returned in San Francisco on 21 February) and flew back home to Honolulu from Mexico.
Illinois: The Illinois and Chicago public-health departments announced that a former passenger of Grand Princess tested (presumptive) positive.
The passenger, a woman in her 50s, had travelled on the same cruise to Mexico, and disembarked at San Francisco on 21 February.
She was hospitalised and isolated in stable condition.
She is a special education assistant in the Chicago public school system, and the school where she worked was to be closed the following week, with all at-risk staff requested to self-quarantine for 14 days.
Utah: The Department of Health confirmed that the first (presumptive) case in Utah is a former passenger of Grand Princess living in Davis County.
Canada:
British Columbia: Health officials announced that two cases are former passengers of Grand Princess.
Both in their 60s, the two patients rode the ship to Mexico and back to California.
United States:
California:
Fresno County: Officials confirmed that a former passenger of Grand Princess had tested positive.
The former passenger was on the ship during the trip to Mexico from 11–21 February 2020.
The family of the patient is reported to be self-monitoring.
A Taiwanese-American tourist, who had been a passenger on a Nile River cruise ship variously known as MS River Anuket or Asara, discovered that she was positive for SARS-CoV-2 after she returned to Taiwan.
World Health Organization officials informed Egyptian authorities of the situation, and all crew members and 150 passengers aboard the cruise ship were tested for SARS-CoV-2.
On 7 March 2020, health authorities announced that 45 people on board had tested positive despite being asymptomatic, and that the ship had been placed in quarantine at a dock in Luxor.
On 13 March 2020, five passengers tested positive for the COVID-19 virus aboard MS Braemar.
As a result, the ship was denied entry into its destination, the Bahamas.
The infected patients were discovered after a former passenger of the cruise tested positive in the Canadian province of Alberta.
The infected passenger disembarked off the cruise in Kingston, Jamaica, but it was unknown where they contracted the disease.Sint Maarten also denied a request from the cruise to allow passengers to fly out.Cuba finally allowed the ship to dock and evacuated all travelers to the United Kingdom.
On 12 March, two passengers aboard Costa Magica were reported to be tested positively for COVID-19 while quarantined in Martinique.
The ship with 3,300 people on board had been disallowed entry in several sea ports including in Grenada, Tobago, Barbados and Saint Lucia, due to over 300 Italian nationals on board.
On 8 March, an Italian woman was quarantined in the U.S. Territory of Puerto Rico while being tested for the virus.
She had arrived there via Costa Luminosa, a cruise ship that had departed from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, U.S..
On 13 March she, her husband and a third person's tests came back positive for the virus.On 21 March local news in Puerto Rico reported the death of the woman.
Silversea Cruises ship Silver Shadow was blocked from disembarking its 608 passengers and crew at the port of Recife in Brazil, as a 78-year-old Canadian aboard had been suspected of having the virus.
Two passengers were later medically disembarked, and one of them tested positive for the virus.
Silver Explorer docked in Castro, Chile, with 111 passengers and 120 crew, after an 83-year-old man fell ill and tested positive for the virus.
On 20 March 2020, it was announced that three passengers and a crew member of Ruby Princess had tested positive for the virus.
The ship had docked in Sydney Harbour, and the passengers had disembarked before the results came back positive.
The ship had returned to Sydney with 1,100 crew members and 2,700 passengers, and 13 people that were sick were tested for the virus.
AIDAmira: Six passengers on the ship have been isolated, after flying on a plane with a sailor who later tested positive with the virus.
More than 1,700 are now trapped on the cruise ship, docked at Cape Town, South Africa.
Golden Princess: At least three passengers have been quarantined by the ship's doctor, according to local health officials.
It is en route for Melbourne.
MV Mahabaahu: Several passengers and crew members were quarantined after an American passenger who have traveled in the ship in Brahmaputra River in Assam, India was tested positive in Bhutan.
AIDAaura: The German cruise ship AIDAaura, with about 1,200 people on board, was held on 3 March 2020 in the harbour of Haugesund, Norway, while two asymptomatic German passengers were tested who had been in contact with a person who subsequently developed COVID-19; their test results were negative.
Carnival Panorama: On 7 March 2020, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) halted passengers disembarking from the cruise ship Carnival Panorama docked at Long Beach Cruise Terminal in California when a female passenger was reported to be sick.
The sick passenger was transported to a hospital to be tested, and all passengers were held on board the ship pending test results.
The test came back negative late that evening, and disembarkation was scheduled to resume the next morning.
Carnival Panorama was returning from a trip to Mexico with scheduled stops at Cabo San Lucas, Mazatlán and Puerto Vallarta, which were also scheduled stops for Grand Princess during the previous month.
Costa Fortuna: The Italian cruise ship Costa Fortuna attempted to dock at Phuket, Thailand, on 6 March 2020, but was denied by Thai officials because it was carrying passengers who had left Italy within the past two weeks.
On 7 March, the ship attempted to dock at Penang in northern Malaysia, but was denied pursuant to a complete ban on cruise ships.
Costa Serena: Fifteen passengers aboard Costa Serena on 24 January were suspected to have SARS-CoV-2.
The ship arrived at its destination, Tianjin, China, on 25 January.
With 17 suspected cases, and 146 (of 3,706) passengers from Hubei province where the disease originated, an emergency was declared.
The cruise ship was locked down for 19 hours before the passengers were allowed to disembark; no confirmed cases were found.
Costa Smeralda: In January, Costa Smeralda and her 6,000 passengers were quarantined at the port of Civitavecchia in Rome, Italy, following two suspected cases.
A spokesperson from Costa Cruises stated that a 54-year-old woman aboard the ship was suffering from a fever and that she and her husband were both being tested.
They were found to be uninfected, and passengers were allowed to go on shore the next day.
Grandeur of the Seas: On 12 March 2020, Grandeur of the Seas was denied a request to berth at the Austin "Babe" Monsanto Marine Terminal in the United States Virgin Islands because a crew member had  travelled to Japan within the previous two weeks, even though no confirmed cases of coronavirus were on board.
The ship, however, was eventually allowed to return to transport a seriously-injured passenger to a hospital for treatment.
Maasdam: 842 guests and 542 crew members from Holland America Line's Maasdam were not allowed to disembark in Honolulu on 19 March 2020.
MS Monarch: On 14 March, Panama repatriated 1,504 Colombian tourists from the cruise ship Monarch.
Since the port of Cartagena, Colombia is closed, the people have to fly from Colón, Panama.
About 300 people were still waiting to buy tickets.
MSC Meraviglia: On 26 February, Mexican authorities granted permission for MSC Meraviglia, registered in Malta, to dock in Cozumel, Quintana Roo, because she carried a passenger presumed to be infected with the coronavirus.
The ship was previously denied access to ports in Jamaica and the Cayman Islands.
Two cases of common seasonal flu were found.
Norwegian Jewel: The cruise ship was stranded in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, after being denied entry into Papeete, French Polynesia and Lautoka, Fiji, due to fears of possible infection.
On 19 March the 1,700 passengers were prevented from disembarking in Honolulu.
Pacific Princess: Though there have been no confirmed cases on board, the ship has been rejected to dock at numerous destinations including Bali, Singapore, Phuket, Thailand, and Sri Lanka.
The ship is currently enroute to an uncertain future for Fremantle, Australia.
Regal Princess: On 7 March, two crew members of Regal Princess were tested and the docking of the ship at Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, U.S., was delayed for about a day while waiting for test results.
The tests were negative, and the crew did not have respiratory complications, so the ship was allowed to dock.
Royal Princess: As a crew member from Grand Princess had transferred to Royal Princess fifteen days earlier, the CDC issued a "no-sail order" for Royal Princess on 8 March 2020, prompting Princess Cruises to cancel the ship's seven-day cruise to Mexico before it departed Los Angeles.
Sun Princess: Princess Cruises ship Sun Princess was not allowed to dock at a port in Madagascar on 13 February 2020.
as it had visited Thailand less than 14 days before.
The ship docked at the French island of Réunion on 1 March, but passengers were met by a crowd of about 30 who insisted that the passengers be tested and tried to prevent them from leaving the port area.
Objects were thrown at passengers, and the police deployed tear gas.
Princess Cruises said that there was no evidence of SARS-CoV-2 on the ship.
Timeline of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic in November 2019 – January 2020
This article documents the chronology and epidemiology of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus responsible for the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic originating in Wuhan, China.
It may not include all contemporary major responses and measures.
Furthermore, some developments may become known or fully understood only in retrospect.
(This omnibus timeline is divided into monthly sections and articles: This chronological section covers November 2019 to January 2020, the next February 2020, and so on.)
A confirmed case of the novel coronavirus emerged on 17 November 2019, according to 13 March 2020 reports of official Chinese government sources, but was not recognized at that time.
There may have been earlier patients; the search for them continues.
The first known patient started experiencing symptoms on 1 December 2019.
He had not been to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market of Wuhan.
No epidemiological link could be found between this case and later cases.
Between 8 and 18 December 2019, seven cases later diagnosed with novel coronavirus were documented; two of them were linked with the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market; five were not.
Chinese state broadcaster CCTV reported in a broadcast airing on 12 January 2020 that a "new viral outbreak was first detected in the city of Wuhan, China, on 12 December 2019."
Chinese epidemiologists with the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) published an article on 20 January 2020 stating that the first cluster of patients with "pneumonia of an unknown cause" had been identified on 21 December 2019.
First publicly reported collection of virus sample from patient for genetic sequencing.
Report of medical staffs in two hospitals in Wuhan suspected to be infected and were being isolated around 25 December.
On 26 December 2019, a laboratory identified the coronavirus from the sample collected on 24 December as to be most closely related to a bat SARS-like coronavirus.
On 27 December 2019, almost complete genetic sequencing of the previous sample have been finished and shared to Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College (CAMS&PUMC).
According to a CCDC publication on 31 January 2020, the facts leading up to the identification of the 2019-nCoV were as follows, "On 29 December 2019, a hospital in Wuhan admitted four individuals with pneumonia and recognized that all four had worked in the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, which sells live poultry, aquatic products, and several kinds of wild animals to the public.
The hospital reported this occurrence to the CCDC, which led Wuhan CCDC staff to initiate a field investigation with a retrospective search for pneumonia patients potentially linked to the market.
The investigators found additional patients linked to the market, and on 30 December, health authorities from Hubei Province reported this cluster to CCDC.
The following day, CCDC sent experts to Wuhan to support the investigation and control effort.
Samples from these patients were obtained for laboratory analyses."
On 30 December 2019, genetic sequencing report of the pathogen of a patient indicated inaccurately the discovery of Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS coronavirus) in the test result.
After receiving the test result, multiple doctors in Wuhan shared the information via internet, including Dr. Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist at Wuhan Central Hospital, who posted a warning to alumni from his medical school class via a WeChat online forum that a cluster of seven patients treating within the ophthalmology department had been unsuccessfully treated for symptoms of viral pneumonia and diagnosed with SARS.
Because these patients did not respond to traditional treatments, they were quarantined in an ER department of the Wuhan Central Hospital.
In the WeChat post, Li falsely posted that "X Hospital has many confirmed cases of SARS" and "There had been 7 confirmed cases of SARS".
Dr. Li posted a snippet of an RNA analysis finding "SARS coronavirus" and extensive bacteria colonies in a patient's airways.
Dr. Li contracted this coronavirus from a patient he treated, was hospitalized on 12 January 2020 and died on 7 February 2020.News of an outbreak of "pneumonia of unknown origin" started circulating on social media on the evening of 30 December 2019.
The social media reports stated that 27 patients in Wuhan—most of them stall holders at the Huanan Seafood Market—had been treated for the mystery illness.On the evening of 30 December 2019, an "urgent notice on the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause" was issued by the Wuhan Municipal Health Committee on its Weibo social media account.
It was reported that since the beginning of December, there had been "a successive series of patients with unexplained pneumonia"—27 suspected cases in total, seven of which were in critical condition and 18 were stable, two of which were on the verge of being discharged soon.
The Wuhan Municipal Health Committee reported to the WHO that 27 people had been diagnosed with pneumonia of unknown cause.
Most were stallholders from the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, seven of whom were in critical condition.
The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission also made a public announcement regarding the situation.Early investigations into the cause of the pneumonia ruled out seasonal flu, SARS, MERS and bird flu.Hong Kong Secretary for Food and Health Sophia Chan Siu-chee announced after an urgent night-time meeting with officials and experts, "[any suspected cases] including the presentation of fever and acute respiratory illness or pneumonia, and travel history to Wuhan within 14 days before onset of symptoms, we will put the patients in isolation."
On 31 December 2019, China contacts the WHO and informs them of "cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology (unknown cause) detected in Wuhan"An "urgent notice on the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause" was issued to the Wuhan Municipal Health Center.As a result of the official announcement of the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan immediately tightened their inbound screening processes.Qu Shiqian, a vendor at the Huanan Seafood Market, said government officials had disinfected the premises on 31 December 2019 and told stallholders to wear masks.
Qu said he had only learnt of the pneumonia outbreak from media reports.
"Previously I thought they had flu," he said.
"It should be not serious.
We are fish traders.
How can we get infected?""Chinese state television reported that a team of experts from the National Health Commission had arrived in Wuhan on 31 December 2019 to lead the investigation, while the People's Daily said the exact cause remained unclear and it would be premature to speculate."
Chinese state broadcaster CCTV reported that a team of senior health experts had been dispatched to the city of Wuhan and were reported to be "conducting relevant inspection and verification work."Tao Lina, a public health expert and former official with Shanghai's Centre for disease control and prevention, said, "I think we are [now] quite capable of killing it in the beginning phase, given China's disease control system, emergency handling capacity and clinical medicine support."
According to information reported by the South China Morning Post on 13 March 2020, Chinese authorities had identified 266 people who had been infected before the beginning of 2020.According to the Chinese state-sponsored Xinhua News, the Huanan Seafood Market was closed on 1 January 2020 for "regulation."
However, in the Consortium's report of 24 January 2020, it was stated that the Huanan Seafood Market had been closed on 1 January 2020 for "cleaning and disinfection.However the virus could only stay on surfaces for so long so this was useless"
On 2 January, 41 admitted hospital patients in Wuhan, China, were confirmed to have contracted (laboratory-confirmed) the 2019-nCoV (Novel coronavirus); 27 (66%) patients had direct exposure to Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market.
All 41 patients were subsequently relocated from the hospital they had originally been diagnosed in to the Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan, China.
On 3 January 2020, Chinese scientists at the National Institute of Viral Disease Control and Prevention (IVDC) determined the genetic sequence of the novel β-genus coronaviruses (naming it '2019-nCoV') from specimens collected from patients in Wuhan, China, and three distinct strains were established.Health authorities in Wuhan reported 44 cases, a big jump from the 27 reported on Tuesday.
Eleven of the 44 were seriously ill, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission said, although there had been no reported deaths to date.
The health of the 121 close contacts of the cases was being monitored.On 3 January 2020, Dr. Li Wenliang, a Wuhan ophthalmologist, was summoned to the Wuhan Public Security Bureau where he was told to sign an official confession and admonition letter promising to cease spreading false "rumors" regarding the coronavirus.
In the letter, he was accused of "making false comments" that had "severely disturbed the social order".
The letter stated, "We solemnly warn you: If you keep being stubborn, with such impertinence, and continue this illegal activity, you will be brought to justice—is that understood?"
Dr. Li signed the confession writing: "Yes, I understand."In late January, The Supreme People’s Court rebuked police for punishing Li and his fellow doctors.
The Wuhan police clarified that Li Wenliang was not arrested or fined, but was warned as he had spread that "There had been 7 confirmed cases of SARS", which was not true.The HHS Secretary Dr. Alex Azar was alerted on January 3 that CDC director Dr. Robert Redfield  had discussions with Chinese doctors about the virus.
The head of the University of Hong Kong's Centre for Infection, Ho Pak-leung, warned that the city should implement the strictest possible monitoring system for a mystery new viral pneumonia that infected dozens of people on the mainland, as it was highly possible that the illness was spreading from human to human.
The microbiologist also warned that there could be a surge in cases during the upcoming Chinese New Year.
Ho said he hoped the mainland would release more details as soon as possible about the patients infected with the disease, such as their medical history, to help experts analyse the illness and to allow for more effective preventive measures to be put in place.The Singapore Ministry of Health said on Saturday, 4 January, that it had been notified of the first suspected case of the "mystery Wuhan virus" in Singapore, involving a three-year-old girl from China who had pneumonia and a travel history to the Chinese city of Wuhan.
On 5 January, the Singapore Ministry of Health released a press statement stating that the earlier suspected case was not linked to the pneumonia cluster in Wuhan and was also tested negative for the  SARS and MERS-CoV.Chinese officials were criticized for failing to disclose any information about the "mysterious virus" that machine translations of official reports suggested may be caused by a new coronavirus.The WHO waited for China to release information about the "mysterious new pneumonia virus".
The United Nations agency activated its incident-management system at the country, regional and global level and was standing ready to launch a broader response if it was needed.
The WHO's regional office in Manila said in Twitter posts Saturday.: "#China has reported to WHO regarding a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, Hubei Province.The Govt has also met with our country office, and updated @WHO on the situation.
Govt actions to control the incident have been instituted and investigations into the cause are ongoing."The Wuhan Institute of Virology didn't respond to an emailed request for comment on the infectious source.
The number of suspected cases reached 59 with seven in a critical condition.
All were quarantined and local medical officials commenced the monitoring of 163 of their contacts.
At this time, there had been no reported cases of human-to-human transmission or presentations in healthcare workers.
On Monday, 6 January, the Wuhan health authorities announced they continued seeking the cause but had so far ruled out influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, and coronaviruses SARS and MERS as the respiratory pathogen that had infected 59 people as of 5 January.
Since the outburst of social media discussion of the mysterious pneumonia outbreak in Wuhan, China, Chinese authorities censored the hashtag #WuhanSARS and were now investigating anyone who was allegedly spreading misleading information about the outbreak on social media.The world continued to wait for China to disclose more information about what had triggered an unexplained pneumonia outbreak in Wuhan, China's tenth-largest city."The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a travel notice Monday for travelers to Wuhan, Hubei province, China due to the cluster of cases of pneumonia of an unknown etiology…"
Scientists in China announced the discovery of a new coronavirus.South Korea announced the first possible case of virus coming from China.
South Korea put a 36-year-old Chinese woman under isolated treatment amid concerns that she had brought back a form of viral pneumonia that had sickened dozens in mainland China and Hong Kong in the previous weeks.
The unidentified woman, who worked for a South Korean company near capital Seoul, had experienced cough and fever since returning from a five-day trip to China on 30 December, the KCDC said in a press release.
The woman had spent time in Wuhan, China, but had not visited the Huanan Seafood Market.
The WHO confirmed that the novel coronavirus had been isolated from one person who had been hospitalised.
On the same day, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control posted its first risk assessment.
The WHO also reported that Chinese authorities had acted swiftly, identifying the novel coronavirus within weeks of the onset of the outbreak, with the total number of positively tested people being 41.
The first death from the virus occurred in a 61-year-old man who was a regular customer at the market.
He had several significant medical conditions, including chronic liver disease, and died from heart failure and pneumonia.
The incident was reported in China by the health commission via Chinese state media on 11 January.Chinese scientists reported on Chinese state broadcaster CCTV that they had found a new "coronavirus in 15 of 57 patients with the illness in the central city of Wuhan, saying it has been preliminarily identified as the pathogen for the outbreak".
The scientists announced that the current 'Wuhan Virus', a coronavirus, appears to not be as lethal as SARS.
They reported that the new viral outbreak was first detected in the city of Wuhan on 12 December 2019.
Additionally, a total of 59 people have been identified as contracting the illness, seven patients had been in a critical condition at some stage, and no healthcare workers were reported as having been infected.
The gene sequencing data of the isolated 2019-nCoV, a virus from the same family as the SARS coronavirus, was posted on Virological.org by researchers from Fudan University, Shanghai.
A further three sequences from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, one from the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, and one from Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan were posted to the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) portal.
The same day, Public Health England issued its guidance.On 10 January 2020, Dr. Li Wenliang, Chinese ophthalmologist and coronavirus whistleblower, started having symptoms of a dry cough.
On 12 January 2020, Dr. Wenliang started having a fever.
He was admitted to the hospital on 14 January 2020.
His parents also contracted the coronavirus (presumably from Dr. Wenliang) and were admitted to the hospital with him.
Dr. Wenliang tested negative several times for the coronavirus until finally testing positive on 30 January 2020.First two patients in Shenzhen, Guangdong, China attend University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital.
The first two patients in Shenzhen city transferred into negative pressure room in Third People's Hospital of Shenzhen City due to matching lab test result, symptoms, and epidemiology and are being listed as suspected cases.
The cases were not confirmed at the time, because requirement from the Chinese government at the time was that first case in each individual cities need to be submitted to provincial CDC, verified by national CDC, and then evaluated and confirmed by a specific diagnostic team in national CDC.
In China, more than 700 close contacts of the 41 confirmed cases, including more than 400 healthcare workers, had been monitored, with no new cases reported in China since 5 January.
The WHO published initial guidance on travel advice, testing in the laboratory and medical investigation.
The USCDC announced that the genome had been posted on the NIH genetic sequence database, GenBank.
On the same day, Thailand witnessed the first confirmed case of 2019-nCoV, the first outside China.
The affected 61-year-old Chinese woman, who is a resident of Wuhan, had not visited the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, but was noted to have been to other markets.
She had arrived in Bangkok on 8 January.
On 14 January, two of the 41 confirmed cases in Wuhan were reported to include a married couple, raising the possibility of human-to-human transmission.On 14 January, Maria Van Kerkhove, acting head of WHO's emerging diseases unit said that there had been limited human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, mainly small clusters in families, adding that "it is very clear right now that we have no sustained human-to-human transmission"
A second death occurred in a 69-year-old man in China on 15 January.
The WHO published a protocol on diagnostic testing for 2019-nCoV, developed by a virology team from Charité Hospital.
On 16 January, the WHO was alerted by Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare that the first case in Japan, a 30-year-old male Chinese national had tested positive to 2019-nCoV during a hospital stay between 10 and 15 January.
He had not visited the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, but possibly had close contact with an affected person in Wuhan.
On 17 January, Thailand's second confirmed case was reported in a 74-year-old woman who arrived in Bangkok on a flight from Wuhan.
The number of laboratory-confirmed cases rose to 45 in China.Yang Xiaobo, head of the Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, died of pneumonia caused by the virus on 17 January.
After the first 41 laboratory-confirmed cases were identified on January 2, 2020, Chinese officials announced no new cases for the next 16 days, then reported 17 additional laboratory-confirmed cases, three of which were in critical condition.
This brought the number of laboratory-confirmed cases in China to 62.
The patients' ages ranged from 30 to 79.
19 were discharged and eight remain critical.On the same day, the Wuhan City government held an annual banquet in the Baibuting community celebrating the Chinese New Year with forty thousand families in attendance despite the officials' knowledge of the spread of the Wuhan coronavirus.
They shared meals, plates and ate together.
On 21 January 2020 when Wuhan mayor Zhou Xianwang was asked on state television why this banquet was held even after the number of cases had risen to 312 he responded, "The reason why the Baibuting community continued to host the banquet this year was based on the previous judgment that the spread of the epidemic was limited between humans, so there was not enough warning."
On 19 January, the first confirmed cases were reported in China, outside Wuhan, one in the southern province of Guangdong and two in Beijing.
Wuhan reported 136 additional laboratory-confirmed cases, bringing the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in China to 201.
A new death was also reported in Wuhan, bringing the total number of fatalities in China to three.
On 20 January, after two medical staff were infected in Guangdong, China announced that the virus was human-to-human transmissible.Scientists from the China CDC identified three different strains of the 2019-nCoV confirming that the original Wuhan coronavirus had mutated into two additional strains.Chinese premier Li Keqiang urged decisive and effective efforts to prevent and control the epidemic.
First confirmed case reported in South Korea.
Beijing and Guangdong reported an additional three and thirteen laboratory-confirmed cases, respectively.
Shanghai confirms its first case, bringing the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in China to 218.
The investigation team from China's National Health Commission confirmed for the first time that the coronavirus can be transmitted between humans.
At least two people had become infected whilst living hundreds of miles from Wuhan.Five attendees of an as-yet-unnamed private international sales company meeting of 109 attendees, 94 from overseas, held from 20–22 January at the Grand Hyatt Hotel, Singapore were diagnosed with the Wuhan coronavirus upon returning home: one from Malaysia, two from South Korea and two from Singapore.
One of the attendees was from Wuhan, China.
It was reported that the company held a buffet for their delegates.
These four diagnoses were not reported until 5 February 2020.
The first laboratory-confirmed case in Singapore of an unrelated 67 year-old native of Wuhan was not reported until 23 January 2020.
These cases linked to the meeting were the first evidence that the Wuhan coronavirus had spread through human-to-human contact outside China, which the WHO has said is deeply concerning and could signal evidence of a much larger outbreak.
As of 5 February 2020, the sister of a Malaysian who attended the meeting had been infected and four more local staff in Singapore were confirmed as having virus symptoms.
A total of 291 cases have now been reported across major cities in China, including Beijing and Shanghai.
However, most patients are in Wuhan, the central city of 11 million at the heart of the outbreak.A report by the MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis at Imperial College London suggested there could be more than 1,700 infections.
However, Gabriel Leung, the dean of medicine at the University of Hong Kong, put the figure closer to 1,300.After 300 confirmed diagnoses and 6 deaths, Chinese state media warned lower-level officials not to cover up the spread of a new coronavirus.
Officials declared that anyone who concealed new cases would "be nailed on the pillar of shame for eternity", the political body responsible for law and order said.
Local Chinese officials initially withheld information about the epidemic from the public.
It later vastly under-reported the number of people that had been infected, downplayed the risks and failed to provide timely information that experts say could have saved lives.
In its commentary published online on Tuesday January 20, 2020, the Communist Party's Central Political and Legal Commission talked of China having learned a "painful lesson" from the SARS epidemic and called for the public to be kept informed.
Deception, it warned, could "turn a controllable natural disaster into a man-made disaster".The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission reported at least 15 medical workers in Wuhan have also been infected with the virus, with one in a critical condition.WHO Situation Report 1: (Please note that the WHO Situation Reports as official reportage stand on their own.)
Confirmed cases were reported in several new locations in China.
Zhejiang province and Tianjin reported five and two laboratory-confirmed cases, respectively.
Guangdong reported three additional laboratory-confirmed cases.
Shanghai and Henan province reported an additional four and one laboratory-confirmed cases, respectively.
One laboratory-confirmed case was reported in Sichuan province, and Chongqing reported five laboratory-confirmed cases.
Shandong, Hunan, and Yunnan all reported one laboratory-confirmed case each.
Jiangxi reported two laboratory-confirmed cases.
The total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in China increased to 312 and the death toll increased to six.New cases were also reported outside of mainland China.
Taiwan reported its first laboratory-confirmed case, and the United States reported its first laboratory-confirmed case in the state of Washington, the first in North America.China's Wuhan Institute filed to patent the use of Gilead's remdesivir for the treatment of novel coronavirus.
WHO Situation Report 2:
New cases: Macau and Hong Kong reported their first laboratory-confirmed cases, with Hong Kong reporting its second on the evening of 22 January.
Beijing reported an additional five laboratory-confirmed cases, while Guangdong reported an additional nine laboratory-confirmed cases.
Shanghai reported an additional five laboratory-confirmed cases, while Tianjin reported an additional two laboratory-confirmed cases.
Zhejiang and Jiangxi reported an additional five and one laboratory-confirmed cases, respectively.
Liaoning reported its first two laboratory-confirmed cases.
Guizhou, Fujian, Anhui, Shanxi and Ningxia reported one laboratory-confirmed case each.
Hunan reported three additional laboratory-confirmed cases.
Guangxi reported two laboratory-confirmed cases.
In all, the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in China increased to 571 and the death toll to 17.
Internationally, two more laboratory-confirmed cases were reported in Thailand, raising the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in Thailand to four.New data showed indications of the current rapid spread of the disease and an increase in the rate of transmission.Officials announce a quarantine of the greater Wuhan, China area to commence 23 January 2020 at 10:00 am.
No traffic will be allowed in or out of the city.
WHO Situation Report 3:Jiangsu reported its first laboratory-confirmed case.
Heilongjiang reported its first two laboratory-confirmed cases.
Both Fujian and Guangxi reported an additional three laboratory-confirmed cases each.
Shanghai reported an additional seven laboratory-confirmed cases.
Xinjiang reported two laboratory-confirmed cases.
Shaanxi reported three laboratory-confirmed cases.
Gansu reported two laboratory-confirmed cases.
Macau also reported its second laboratory-confirmed case, another 66-year-old man from Wuhan.
In all, the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in mainland China increased to 628 while the death toll remained at 17.
Singapore reported its first laboratory-confirmed case, a 66-year-old man from China.
Vietnam confirmed its first two laboratory-confirmed cases, a 65 or 66-year-old father and 27 or 28-year-old son from China.A scientific preprint from the Wuhan institute of Virology is posted on Biorxiv (later published on Nature) announcing that a bat virus with 96% similarity had been sequenced in a Yunnan cave in 2013, whose sequence is posted the next day on public databases.
It is  confirmed by comparing infectivity of cells expressing or not expressing ACE2 that the novel coronavirus uses this same entry receptor as SARS-CoV..
Wuhan suspended all public transportation from 10 a.m. onwards, including all bus, metro and ferry lines.
Additionally, all outbound trains and flights were halted.
WHO Situation Report 4:
Shandong reported six additional laboratory-confirmed cases.
Liaoning reported one additional laboratory-confirmed case.
Fujian reported four additional laboratory-confirmed cases.
Ningxia reported one additional laboratory-confirmed case.
Shanghai reported 13 additional laboratory-confirmed cases, bringing the total up to 33.Japan, South Korea, and the United States all confirmed their second cases.
Singapore confirmed its second and third cases.
Thailand confirmed its fifth case.
Hong Kong confirmed three additional cases, bringing the total number to five.
Nepal confirmed its first case, a student who returned from Wuhan.
France reported its first three confirmed cases, the first occurrences in the EU.
The French Health Minister Agnès Buzyn stated that it is likely other cases would arise in the country.The first confirmed incidence of human-to-human transmission outside of China was documented by the WHO in Vietnam.A study by Chinese researchers indicates that people can be symptom-free for several days while the coronavirus is incubating, increasing the risk of contagious infection without forewarning signs.A consortium of Chinese medical experts charged by the Chinese CDC with investigating the inception of the virus published their report in The Lancet, reporting details of 41 first known patients.By the end of the day, the entire Hubei province had gone under a city-by-city quarantine, apart from Xiangyang and Shennongjia Forestry District.
Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping called the "accelerating spread" of the coronavirus a "grave situation" in a Party Politburo meeting, and that it was "mutating" as Beijing escalates measures to contain the illness.WHO Situation Report 5:Australia confirmed its first four cases, one in Victoria and three in New South Wales.
Malaysia reported its first three cases in Johor Bahru, and a fourth case later.
Japan confirmed its third case.
Canada confirmed its first case in Toronto.
Thailand added two new cases for a total of seven.
Singapore confirmed their fourth case.A Chinese and a Sri Lankan suspected with the infection were admitted to a hospital in Sri Lanka.Liang Wudong, a 62-year-old doctor, reportedly died in Hubei province from the coronavirus.
WHO Situation Report 6:
The Spring Festival holiday was extended to contain the coronavirus outbreak.
Shanghai reported its first death, an 88-year-old man.The United States confirmed its third, fourth, and fifth cases: two in California and one in Arizona.
Macau confirmed three additional cases, bringing its total to five.
Hong Kong confirmed its sixth, seventh, and eighth cases.
Thailand has confirmed its eighth case.
The first of five patients was already discharged.
There are another 39 suspected cases awaiting confirmation.The Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) has started developing vaccines against the coronavirus, an official with the center said on Sunday.Health officials in Ivory Coast are dealing with a suspected case of coronavirus, the country's health ministry has announced.The United Nation's WHO Director-General Tedros Ghebreyesus said he was on his way to Beijing to confer with Chinese officials and health experts about the coronavirus outbreak.China started requiring nationwide use of monitoring stations for screening, identification and immediate isolation of coronavirus-infected travellers, including at airports, railway stations, bus stations and ports.A tentative clinical profile for the new coronavirus (2019-nCoV) was published by an assistant professor of population health science at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York.
The lethality of the virus is unknown; however, the death toll has now climbed to above three percent.Wang Xianliang, a Hubei provincial government official, died of pneumonia caused by the virus.
WHO Situation Report 7:Dr. Gabriel Leung, Dean of the University of Hong Kong medical school and one of the foremost world experts on SARS and viruses, gave a three-hour presentation published on YouTube wherein he made nowcasts and forecasts of the coronavirus.
Using traditional scientific modeling techniques that predict the spread of viruses, Dr. Leung projected the true number of coronavirus infections was likely 10 time more than the official reported numbers.
Dr. Leung estimated that there were between 44,000–100,000 infections in China as of 24 January 2020.
He stated that draconian measures were needed to slow the progress of the virus but that these measures would have no effect in stopping the coronavirus pandemic.
He projected that the number of infections would continue exponentially peaking out in late April or May 2020.
Dr. Leung predicted that at the peak of the pandemic, there could be up to 100,000 new infections per day.
Dr. Leung subsequently published an article in The Lancet nowcasting and forecasting the likely progression of the Wuhan coronavirus taking into consideration numerous variables.
Zhou Xianwang, the mayor of Wuhan, said on a Chinese state television talkshow that rules imposed by Beijing limited what he could disclose about the threat posed by the Wuhan coronavirus as it unfolded, suggesting "the central government was partially responsible for a lack of transparency that has marred the response to the fast-expanding health crisis."Canada reported its first confirmed case and another presumptive case.
Health officials have confirmed the fifth case of coronavirus in Australia, and have suspected an additional 5.
The Sri Lankan Health Ministry confirms its first case of coronavirus, a 43 year old Chinese woman.
Cambodia confirms its first case of the virus, a Chinese man who came with his family to Sihanoukville.
Singapore confirms a fifth case, a 56 year old Chinese national who arrived from Wuhan on 18 January.
Germany confirmed its first case in Bavaria, a case of domestic transmission.
Taiwan reports its first case of domestic transmission of the coronavirus.Beijing reports its first death from coronavirus.Three new suspected cases in Austria; previous suspected cases tested negative.
The 'Matei Balș' Institute reported the first possible case in Romania., but the first case would not be confirmed until 26 February.
Ecuador reported a suspected case of coronavirus, a Chinese citizen who arrived from Hong Kong., but the first case would not be confirmed until 29 February.
Fiji authorities are holding six Chinese travelers in quarantine in Nadi as a precaution after they failed to gain entry to Samoa due to Samoa's quarantine requirements that were implemented Friday.
The quarantine requirements, imposed after an emergency Cabinet meeting, compel anyone who's been in China to "self-quarantine" in a country free from the coronavirus for 14 days.
In Poland, two children were admitted to the Kraków hospital with the suspicion of coronavirus.
In Mongolia a 14-year-old girl who was studying in China had fallen ill with a suspected case of pneumonia and laryngitis; she was pronounced dead on the same day.
Health authorities have since taken a sample from the deceased girl to be analysed at the National Center for Communicable Diseases in Ulaanbaatar.
Two Mongolian students returning from Taiwan to Chinggis Khaan International Airport have shown symptoms of high fever and rising temperature and were put into quarantine after landing in Mongolia.
In Switzerland, two people were put under quarantine at the Triemli Hospital in Zurich; both had previously been to China.
These cases later turned up negative.In Germany, the first specific, global case of coronavirus being transmitted by a person with no symptoms has been reported.
The originally-infected individual is from Shanghai.South Korean health officials met with Korean life science company representatives to speed the development of a test.
China's Supreme People's Court ruled that whistleblower, Li Wenliang, had not committed the crime of spreading "rumors" when on 30 December 2019 he posted to a WeChat forum for medical school alumni that seven patients under his care appeared to have contracted SARS.
In their ruling, the Supreme People's Court stated, "If society had at the time believed those 'rumours', and wore masks, used disinfectant and avoided going to the wildlife market as if there were a SARS outbreak, perhaps it would've meant we could better control the coronavirus today," the court said.
"Rumours end when there is openness."WHO Situation Report 8:Thailand confirms six more cases, bringing the total infected there to 14.
Thailand's health minister, Anutin Charnvirakul, states that "we are not able to stop the spread" of coronavirus in the country.
Singapore confirms two more cases, bringing the total infected in Singapore to seven.
That was followed by a Hubei-related suspension from 29 January.
Japan confirms 3 additional cases, bringing the total infected in Japan to seven, including a man who had never visited Wuhan.
He was working as a tour bus driver and had driven a group from Wuhan earlier in January.
Germany's first confirmed case, reported the previous day, had occurred in a German citizen who had not travelled to China.
However, he had close contact with a visiting Chinese colleague who reported starting to feel ill during her return flight to Shanghai and she was diagnosed with coronavirus infection after arriving in China.
Germany confirmed 3 new cases, all of whom were coworkers of the first confirmed patient.
France confirmed its fourth case, an elderly Chinese tourist who is in critical condition.The Brazilian Ministry of Health reports three suspected cases ongoing in three locations: Belo Horizonte (MG), Curitiba (PR) and São Leopoldo (RS).
Canada reports a new presumptive case in British Columbia, a man in his 40s who had recently travelled to Wuhan.A UK-Chinese medical research paper reports a statistical model finding that "estimates suggest the actual number of infected cases could be much higher than the reported, with estimated 26,701 cases (as of 28th January 2020)."Scientists from The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity (Doherty Institute) in Melbourne reported that they had successfully grown 2019-nCoV from a patient sample.Xiangyang became quarantined starting 00:00; the entire Hubei province thus became quarantined save for Shennongjia Forestry District.
WHO Situation Report 9:Tibet reported its first suspected case identified on the previous day and declared a level 1 health emergency in the evening, the last mainland provincial division to do so.
Suspected cases have now been reported in all 31 mainland provincial divisions.
Companies in Hubei are required not to resume services before 13 February, and schools in Hubei are to postpone the reopening of schools.The UAE confirms its first case.
Shortly afterwards, an Emirates' news agency confirmed four people from a Chinese family to be infected.
Finland reports its first case of the virus in Lapland, found in a Chinese tourist who left Wuhan before Wuhan was locked down.
Singapore confirms three more cases of the virus, bringing the total infected to 10.
Malaysia confirms three additional cases, bringing its total to seven.
Japan reports four additional cases, including a tour bus guide that was on the same bus as one of the cases confirmed on 28 January and three evacuated from Wuhan.
France confirmed a fifth case, the daughter of the patient in the fourth case.Two Chinese nationals were placed in isolation wards in Armenia amid the first suspected case of coronavirus in the country.
The Chinese nationals were tourists travelling to Armenia from neighbouring Georgia.
Liana Torosyan, the head of the Department of Infectious Diseases, advised that samples will be sent to European labs, as Armenia does not have the capacity to test for the novel coronavirus.
Brazil reports a total of 9 suspected cases in six states of the country.Air Canada is halting all direct flights to China following the federal government's advisory to avoid non-essential travel to the mainland due to the coronavirus epidemic.
The suspension is effective Thursday and slated to last until February 29.
WHO Situation Report 10:Tibet confirms its first case, which was previously suspected.
Cases have now been confirmed in all 31 provincial divisions of mainland China.
India confirms its first case of coronavirus in a student who had returned from Wuhan University to the Indian state of Kerala.
Philippines confirms its first case of coronavirus in a female Chinese national who arrived in Manila via Hong Kong on 21 January.
Japan confirms three more cases, bringing the total to 14.
Malaysia confirms one more case, bringing the total to eight.
Singapore confirms three more cases, bringing the total to 13.
South Korea confirms two more cases, with one of them being the first human-to-human transmission there.
Vietnam confirms three new cases, bringing the total to five.
France confirms its sixth case.
Italy confirms its first two cases in a press conference by the Prime Minister, Giuseppe Conte.
Germany confirms its fifth case, an employee of the company where the four previously known cases are also employed.The United States confirmed its sixth case, the spouse of another patient in Chicago.
This is the first confirmed case of human to human transmission within the United States.
WHO Situation Report 11:The United Kingdom and Russia confirmed their first coronavirus infections.
The first Swedish and Spanish cases were confirmed.
The seventh confirmed case in the U.S. is in Santa Clara County, California.
A fourth case of coronavirus in Canada has been confirmed in London, Ontario.
Thailand confirmed five more cases with the first human-to-human virus transmission inside the country of a local taxi driver, bringing the total to 19.
Singapore confirmed three more cases, bringing the total to 16.
Chinese health experts warn the public that coronavirus patients can become reinfected.
China starts repatriating citizens to Wuhan.
On 20 December 2019, Winner Medical Group decided to cancel their executive meeting in Hubei.
On 30 December 2019, an "urgent notice on the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause" was issued by the Medical Administration and Medical Administration of Wuhan Municipal Health Committee.The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission also made a public announcement regarding the situation.A famous police officer in Jiangning District, Nanjing mentioned the BSL-4 laboratory of Wuhan Institute of Virology when commenting on the outbreak by expressing confidence on its technological power and ability to fix the incident.
Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, the source of the initial pneumonia cases, was closed on 1 January 2020 for cleaning and disinfection.
On the same day, Chinese state news reported that Wuhan police interviewed eight residents for spreading "misinformation" referring to the new infection as another SARS and "exaggerating" the danger.
However, CNA reported on the same date that Wuhan police said they had punished eight people for "publishing or forwarding false information on the internet without verification."On 1 January 2020, a genetic sequencing company was notified by the Wuhan Municipal Health Committee that further sequencing of novel coronavirus samples were no longer allowed, existing samples must be destroyed and all data must be kept secret.
On 2 January 2020, Central Hospital of Wuhan banned its staffs from discussing the disease publicly or recording them using text or image that can be used as evidence; situation of individual patients can only be mentioned verbally when doctors change shift.
On 3 January 2020, China's National Health Committee Office published an announcement classifying the novel coronavirus as a highly pathogenic microorganisms (type 2), and request all the samples to be handed to provincial or higher level health authority, other organization or person with the virus sample should either destroy or transfer them and keep the log, and emphasis that all data must be kept secret and prior approval from the authority will be needed before any results can be published.
On 7 January 2020, Chinese president and party secretary Xi Jinping raised demand on the prevention and control of the pneumonia epidemic caused by novel coronavirus in Wuhan in a Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China meeting, according to article published by himself in February.
The gene sequencing data of the isolated 2019-nCoV, a virus from the same family as the SARS coronavirus, was posted on Virological.org by researchers from Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center and Fudan University, Shanghai.
A further three sequences from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, one from the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, and one from Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan were posted to the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) portal.
The same day, Public Health England issued its guidance.Beginning of the 2020 Chunyun travel season in China.
Hubei's provincial representatives from all over the province met in Wuhan until 18 January.Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, the facility that published the first genome sequence of the virus, was closed without reason.
Reporters from Hong Kong being taken to police station after trying to film situation within Wuhan hospital.
Representative from Chinese government and American government sign the phase one trade deal over bilateral trade conflict in Washington D.C.
Chinese premier Li Keqiang urged decisive and effective efforts to prevent and control the epidemic.
Beijing and Guangdong reported an additional three and thirteen laboratory-confirmed cases, respectively.
Shanghai confirms its first case, bringing the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases in China to 218.
The investigation team from China's National Health Commission confirmed that the coronavirus can be transmitted between humans.
The government announced a quarantine until further notice, cancelling outgoing flights and trains from Wuhan, and suspending public transportation in Wuhan, effective 10:00 (02:00 UTC, UTC+08:00) on 23 January.
However, statistics compiled by the Chinese Railway Administration showed that on the same day approximately 100,000 people had already departed from Wuhan Train Station by the deadline.
Furthermore, many Wuhan residents bypassed the checkpoints by taking antipyretics, having seen tips shared on Sina Weibo.At the day's night, Wuhan government announced that citizens must wear face mask in public facilities.
Wuhan suspended all public transportation from 10 a.m. onwards, including all bus, metro and ferry lines.
Additionally, all outbound trains and flights were halted.
In Wuhan, construction began near midnight for a specialist emergency hospital, modelled after the Xiaotangshan Hospital during the 2003 SARS outbreak in Beijing, after it was proposed earlier in the afternoon.
The new Huoshenshan Hospital opened on 3 February with a capacity of at least 1,000 beds.The three provinces of Zhejiang, Guangdong, and Hunan declared a level 1 public health emergency (the highest possible) in chronological order.The release of all seven major films for the Lunar New Year was practically cancelled.
In an example of black humor, Plague Inc., which was released in 2012, surged to become the most popular app in China.
The seven provinces, two autonomous regions, and all four municipalities of Hubei, Anhui, Tianjin, Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing, Sichuan, Jiangxi, Yunnan, Shandong, Fujian, Guangxi, and Hebei declared a level 1 public health emergency, in chronological order.
The city of Jingzhou was quarantined, raising the number of people in quarantined cities to 35 million.
The entire Hubei province now came under a city-by-city quarantine, save for Xiangyang and Shennongjia Forestry District.
All 70,000 Chinese cinemas were closed until further notice.
Multiple tourist sites across China were closed until further notice, including Mount Wutai, Pingyao, Yanmen Pass, Xuanwu Lake, Qixia Mountain, Nanking Massacre Museum, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall, Canton Tower, Gulangyu, Yu Garden, Shanghai Disneyland, West Lake, and Forbidden City.
Citing the coronavirus outbreak, Starbucks and McDonald's suspended some operations in China.The Beijing and Shanghai governments have "urged residents returning from coronavirus outbreak areas to stay at home for 14 days to prevent its spread."
A level 1 health emergency was declared in the 10 provinces and three autonomous regions of Jiangsu, Hainan, Xinjiang, Heilongjiang, Henan, Gansu, Liaoning, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Qinghai, Jilin, Ningxia, and Inner Mongolia, in chronological order.
It is now in effect in all 30 of the 31 provincial-level divisions in mainland China with cases reported, the exception being Tibet.
China's National Health Commission had sent 1,230 medical staff in six groups to Wuhan City, central China's Hubei Province, to combat the novel coronavirus outbreak in the region.
As of 25 January, three of the six groups began their work in the virus-hit area.
Local media earlier reported that 450 military medical personnel have also landed in the city to offer support.
Wuhan announced building a second emergency specialty hospital, named Leishenshan Hospital, with a planned capacity of 1,300 beds, to be in use in half a month.Beijing announced it will halt all inter-provincial bus and train services starting 26 January.The Politburo of the Communist Party of China met to discuss novel coronavirus prevention and control.
Xi Jinping, general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, stated that the country is facing a "grave situation" as the number of infected people is accelerating.Straco has shut Shanghai Ocean Aquarium, Underwater World Xiamen and Lixing Cable Car temporarily to curb the virus spreading around.
The leading group on the prevention and control of the novel coronavirus outbreak was established, led by Chinese Premier Li Keqiang.
The leading group has decided to extend the Spring Festival holiday to contain coronavirus outbreak.
The Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) has started developing vaccines against the coronavirus, an official with the center said on Sunday.The city of Shantou declared a partial lockdown, though this was quickly reversed.China banned all wildlife trade with immediate effect.The United Nation's WHO Director-General Tedros Ghebreyesus said he was on his way to Beijing to confer with Chinese officials and health experts about the coronavirus outbreak.China started requiring nationwide use of monitoring stations for screening, identification and immediate isolation of coronavirus-infected travellers, including at airports, railway stations, bus stations and ports.Schools in Beijing would stay closed until further notice to prevent further spread of the coronavirus.
Separately, the Beijing Government stated it will not lock-down the city.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang visited Wuhan, the centre of the virus outbreak, to direct the epidemic prevention work.China's Finance Ministry and National Health Commission extended 60.33 billion yuan (US$8.74 billion) to help contain coronavirus.Xiangyang announced the suspension of ferry services at 00:00 on 28 January, putting the entirety of Hubei province under a city-by-city quarantine, save for Shennongjia Forestry District.
The move came after the closure of its railway stations at 00:00 on 27 January, and shutting down of its airport and inter-city bus services earlier.Wuhan suspends visa and passports services for Chinese citizens until 30 January.The Shanghai government has said companies in the city are not allowed to resume operations before 9 February.
Chinese tech company Tencent asks staff to work from home until 7 February due to coronavirus.The mayor of Wuhan acknowledges criticism over his handling of the crisis, admitting that information was not released quickly enough.
He said he would resign if it helped with public opinion but pointed out the local government was obliged to seek permission before fully disclosing information about the virus, and that their response had since become "tougher than others".Tangshan suspends public transit to prevent spread of coronavirus.
Wanda Group waives all rent and property fees for all merchants from 24 January to 25 February, amounting to an estimated fee reduction of ¥3-4 billion (US$432–577 million).Sasseur REIT shuts four malls temporarily, with another seven outlet malls shut to slow the outbreak.Dasin Retail Trust shortens hours for its five malls and temporarily closed crowded places.
Tibet reported its first suspected case identified on the previous day and declared a level 1 health emergency in the evening, the last mainland provincial division to do so.
Suspected cases have now been reported in all 31 mainland provincial divisions.
Companies in Hubei are required not to resume services before 13 February, and schools in Hubei are to postpone the reopening of schools.Chinese police drop their case against eight people, accused on 1 January of spreading "false rumours" about a "new SARS-like virus"; they have been referred to as "the eight brave (八勇士)" on some Chinese social media.CapitaLand temporarily shuts all four malls in Wuhan and both malls in Xian after instructions from local authorities, with supermarkets still open.
The company's remaining 45 malls will operate shorter periods.
It has also set up a 10 million Yuan fund to fight the coronavirus.
As of 30 January, inter-provincial charter cars in mainland China and inter-provincial passenger routes to Hubei have all been suspended.
Passenger transport on roads in ten provinces and municipalities including Hubei and Beijing has been suspended, inter-provincial passenger trains have been suspended in 16 provinces, urban bus routes have been suspended or partially suspended in multiple cities in 28 provinces, and urban rail transportation has been suspended in 5 cities including Wuhan.The Huanggang Communist Party committee announced the dismissal of its health chief, Tang Zhihong.
China National Railway Group announced that starting 1 February, rail ticket purchases must provide the traveller's mobile phone number (email address for foreign nationals).Chinese health experts warn the public that coronavirus patients can become reinfected.
China starts repatriating citizens to Wuhan.
In response to Wuhan authority announcement on the "pneumonia of unknown cause", Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan immediately tightened their inbound screening processes as a result.
Thailand began screening passengers arriving from Wuhan at four different airports.Singapore has also begun screening passengers at Changi Airport.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (USCDC) issued a travel watch at Level 1 ("Practice usual precautions") on 6 January, with recommendations on washing hands and more specifically advising avoiding animals, animal markets, and contact with unwell people if travelling to Wuhan.Hong Kong began screening passengers arriving on trains stopped at Wuhan.
The World Health Organization announced that it would hold an emergency meeting on the virus the following day to determine if the virus is a "public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC)".The Panamanian government has enhanced its sanitary control and screening measures at all ports of entry, in order to prevent the spread of the virus, isolating and testing potential cases.
North Korea closed its borders and banned foreign tourists over the virus.WHO's emergency committee was unable to reach a consensus—with one member stating that the vote was "50/50.
Even."—on whether the outbreak should be classified as a PHEIC due to lack of information.
The committee will resume discussion the next day.
Following the first laboratory-confirmed case on 23 January, Singaporean airline Scoot cancelled flights to Wuhan between 23 and 26 January over the virus outbreak after a lockdown was imposed.
Schools have also asked parents to declare their travel plans and monitor their children's health.
Other measures will also be taken to ensure the safety of students.
MINDEF has since issued two medical advisories to service personnel.Flights in and out of North Korea were halted.
Coronavirus cases in Sinuiju were suspected and promptly quarantined for two weeks.
Following the two laboratory-confirmed cases on 23 January, the Vietnam Aviation Authority sent a written directive requesting that all flights to and from Wuhan are to be cancelled immediately until further notice and that the tickets will be refunded.
Exceptionally, the Authority operates four special flights to carry Wuhan passengers home during the period from 24–27 January, and a backward flight to evacuate Vietnamese citizens and diplomats.Border control measures in Singapore have been enhanced and extended to land and sea checkpoints, with the Immigration and Checkpoints Authority and Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore starting temperature checks from noon of that day.The Russian Far East had closed its border with China until 7 February, while Russian tour operators were inhibited starting 27 January.
Hong Kong declared a state of emergency and announced it would close schools until 17 February.
Hong Kong Disneyland and Ocean Park are closed until further notice.The United States announced plans to evacuate US citizens out of Wuhan by charter jet.
The US government later clarified that it only had limited capacity for private citizen evacuations.
Hong Kong announced it will ban anyone who has been to Hubei Province in the last 14 days from entering the city starting 27 January.Singers Andy Lau and Leon Lai have postponed their concerts in Hong Kong and Macau respectively.
Mongolia closed its border with China, shut down schools until 2 March, and called for all public gatherings to be cancelled.
The pair of international border gates Hekou (Yunnan, China)–Lào Cai (Vietnam) are suspended against Chinese tourists.
The decision was declared by the head of Lào Cai Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism, after an urgent notice from Yunnan Province's authorities.The Government of Gilgit Baltistan decided to delay opening the China–Pakistan border crossing point at Khunjerab Pass, scheduled for February.Following the action from Hong Kong authorities, Macau stated that it will deny entry to visitors from the Mainland's Hubei province or those who had visited the province 14 days prior to arrival unless they are virus-free.Singapore imposed a 14 days leave of absence for those working in schools, healthcare and eldercare who travelled to China in the last 14 days.
Students who returned from these places will do home-based learning instead.
In addition, people who went to China the last 14 days must fill health and travel declarations and monitor health with temperature checks.Malaysia suspends all visa facilities for Chinese tourists from Hubei and its neighbouring provinces in China.Tijuana, Mexico receives its final scheduled non-stop flight from mainland China before a previously scheduled suspension of service.
Passengers and crew were screened by health officials upon arrival to the Tijuana International Airport.
Flights between Tijuana and Mainland China are scheduled to resume in May 2020.The USCDC expands travel advisory from Wuhan to the whole of Hubei Province.
Later that day, the US State Department raised the travel advisory for China to Level 3 ("Reconsider Travel: Avoid travel due to serious risks to safety and security.") due to the coronavirus.
The same day, the USCDC again updates its travel health notice to Warning - Level 3, Avoid All Nonessential Travel to China.
The Philippines and Sri Lanka suspended issuance of visas-on-arrival to Chinese nationals.Singapore announced a suspension from 29 January, 12pm of entry or transit for all new visitors with a recent travel history to Hubei within the last 14 days, or holders of China passports issued in Hubei.Hong Kong temporarily closes four of the eleven ports with the Mainland.
Carrie Lam, the Chief Executive, stated the high-speed rail service between Hong Kong and mainland China would be suspended starting 30 January and all cross-border ferry services would also be suspended in a bid to stop the spread of coronavirus.
Additionally, flights from mainland China would be cut in half, cross-border bus services reduced, and the Hong Kong government is asking all its employees (except those providing essential or emergency services) to work from home.
In a later press conference, Carrie Lam said that the Man Kam To and Sha Tau Kok border checkpoints would be closed.Thailand starts scanning all travellers from China with immediate effect.The UK's Foreign Office warns Britons not to travel to mainland China unless their journey is essential.The USCDC stated it was boosting staffing at 20 US airports that have quarantine facilities.Singer Miriam Yeung postponed a concert in Singapore, which was scheduled on 8 February.
This comes after the virus situation in China worsened with most of the logistics coming from there.
28
The government of Papua New Guinea banned all travellers from Asian countries and closed its border with Indonesia.
The order takes effect from 30 January.Palau and Vanuatu temporarily suspended flights from mainland China, Macau, and Hong Kong until the end of February and restricted diplomatic work in those countries.
The Federated States of Micronesia is considering the same measures.The government of Kazakhstan suspended visa issuances to Chinese citizens.
In addition, all transport links from and to China have been halted; accordingly, movement by train will stop on 1 February, and will stop by airplane from 3 February.
Georgia temporarily suspended all direct flights with China.Rasuwa Fort, which is a border crossing between Rasuwa District (Nepal) and Tibet (China), will be sealed for 15 days starting 29 January.
The decision was preceded by a meeting between security and immigration authorities of two countries earlier that day.The WHO announces that its director-general has decided to reconvene their international health regulations emergency committee on 30 January to reconsider declaring a global health emergency, technically a "public health emergency of international concern" (PHEIC).
The reconvening is due "mainly on the evidence of increasing number of cases, human-to-human transmission outside of China, and the further development of transmission."
The committee meeting is planned to start at 13:30 Geneva time.
Further, the WHO announces their having set up "The Pandemic Supply Chain Network (PSCN)" in collaboration with the World Economic Forum.The Government of Canada issued a travel advisory to avoid non-essential travel to China due to the novel coronavirus outbreak.
The Government of Canada also issued a regional travel advisory to avoid all travel to the Province of Hubei—including the cities of Wuhan, Huanggang and Ezhou—due to the imposition of heavy travel restrictions in order to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus.
On the same day, the Minister of Foreign Affairs François-Philippe Champagne announced that an aircraft would be sent to repatriate Canadians from the areas affected by the novel coronavirus in China.
As a result of the travel advisories issued by the Canadian government, Air Canada suspended all direct flights to China until at least 29 February.The Ministry of Popular Power for Health announced that the Rafael Rangel National Institute of Hygiene (Spanish: Instituto Nacional de Higiene Rafael Rangel) in Caracas will perform the detection of other respiratory viruses based on non-influenza types, including coronaviruses in humans.
It is also the only health institute in the country with the installed capacity for the diagnosis of respiratory viruses in Venezuela and is able carry out logistics in the 23 states, the Capital District and Federal Dependencies.British Airways and Lufthansa cancel all flights to and from mainland China.Singapore expanded temperature screening to cover all incoming flights with additional checks on flights from China and passengers from Hubei.The Panama Canal began to require all ships to report if they had any contact with coronavirus-infected countries.
The Panamanian health ministry also established an isolation ward for coronavirus patients.
Vietnam shuts down air traffic with China.
The Ministry of Public Security temporarily ceased issuing visa to Chinese citizens within the epidemic areas.
Additionally, crossing at gateways, airports, seaports are put under higher supervision, with strict monitoring and medical check-ups (applied to both humans and items; prohibited against wildlife animals and derivatives).
Later that day, after confirmation of the virus for the first three Vietnamese patients, the Prime Minister ordered for further visa restrictions apart from diplomatic work, suspension of activities at border gates (with China) which are still active, evacuation for citizens when necessary, and an emergency alert being considered.The Liaison Office between the two Koreas in the border town of Kaesong was shut down for an unspecified time regarding infection concern.
The decision was made after negotiations between the representatives of both countries  early in the morning on 30 January, informed by the Unification Ministry of South Korea.North Korea's news agency KCNA declared a "state emergency" and reported the establishment of anti-epidemic headquarters around the country.Singapore announced that every household was to receive four masks starting from 1 February.Russia announces restrictions on railway travel with China, such that only a direct train between Moscow and Beijing remains.
The WHO director-general declares the coronavirus outbreak a "Public Health Emergency of International Concern" (PHEIC), reversing two previous decisions after emergency committee meetings in the last week.Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte stated in a press conference that Italy had closed all air traffic to and from China.
It is believed that Conte has also called a cabinet meeting for Friday to discuss further actions.
Six thousand people are briefly quarantined on board an Italian cruise ship as tests are carried out on two Chinese passengers suspected of having coronavirus, a spokesman for the Costa Crociere cruise company said.
The same day, all passengers are released as it is found that the ill individual has the flu, not coronavirus.The US State Department issued an updated travel advisory as "Level 4: Do Not Travel to China."
Its website stated that "Those currently in China should consider departing" and warning that "Travelers should be prepared for travel restrictions to be put into effect with little or no advance notice".
Additionally, it authorised American diplomatic staff and their families to evacuate China.
The State of Washington in the US declared a Level 1 Emergency and activated its Emergency Response Center for dealing with the now global coronavirus outbreak.British foreign secretary Dominic Raab disclosed that the emergency flight containing about 120 Britons from Wuhan that was delayed by 24 hours was due to land at RAF Brize Norton on Friday morning, where the passengers will be taken to Wirral for a fortnight's quarantine.Trinidad and Tobago's health min­is­ter, Ter­rance Deyals­ingh, announced that Trinidad and Tobago had decided to implement restrictions on persons travelling from China.
Persons who are living or who have visited China will be barred from entering Trinidad and Tobago unless they had already been out of China 14 days prior to attempting to travel to Trinidad and Tobago.Air France and KLM cancel all flights to mainland China until February 9.Two K-pop concerts in Singapore by Taeyeon and NCT Group respectively were postponed after the virus situation worsened.
Russian authorities announced the border closure with China would be extended to at least 1 March.Authorities in Guangxi (China) and Lạng Sơn (Vietnam) announced the temporary suspension of nine auxiliary border gates (namely in pair: Tân Thanh - 浦寨, Chi Ma - 爱店, Cốc Nam - 弄怀, Bình Nghi - 平宜, Pò Nhùng - 油隘, Bản Chắt - 板烂, Co Sâu - 北山, Na Hình, and Nà Nưa) and border markets starting 31 January until 8 February, and prohibited all travel over cross-border trails.Singapore closed borders to all visitors arriving from mainland China (including passengers transiting through Singapore) except Singaporeans, Singapore residents and long-term visa holders.Macau announced it would postpone schools indefinitely and that schools should contact students to arrange for assignments to be done online.
Hong Kong extends the public holiday to 2 March, and also requests all visitors who have been in Hubei in the past 14 days to be quarantined.
All government employees may work from home until 9 February.Italy declared a state of emergency, the first EU country to do so, and allocates an initial 5 million Euros to tackle the virus.The United States government declares a Public Health Emergency due to the coronavirus, and is closing its borders to all foreign nationals "who pose a threat of transmitting the virus from entering the country and would quarantine U.S. citizens returning from Hubei province in China, the epicenter of the outbreak, for up to 14 days," starting Sunday, February 2 at 5 p.m.
The 195 Americans on the Air Force base in California whom were recently evacuated from Wuhan recently will also be quarantined.Jamaica's health min­is­ter, Christopher Tufton, announced a government decision to ban travel between China and Jamaica.
All persons entering Jamaica from China will be subject to immediate quarantine for at least 14 days, and anyone who was allowed to land and shows symptoms of the virus will be put in immediate isolation.
In keeping with the new policy, 19 Chinese nationals who arrived  at the Norman Manley International Airport on the evening of 31 January were denied entry, quarantined and put on a flight back to China on 1 February.The Ecuadorian Ministry of Health, Catalina Andramuño, announced that the country now possesses reagents for testing new cases locally, becoming the first in South America.LOT Polish Airlines cancels all flights to Beijing until 9 February.
Delta Airlines suspends all China flights, and American Airlines pilots sue for same action.
Later, American Airlines ceased flights to China as well.
Later still, United Airlines halts all flights to China, excepting San Francisco to Hong Kong.Basra International Airport in Iraq has declared that passengers of any nationality travelling from China will be denied entry.Turkish Airlines halted all flights to China until 9 February.K-pop band Got7's concert in Singapore, supposedly on 22 February, was postponed due to the virus.
Timeline of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic in February 2020
Timeline of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic in March 2020
Template:COVID-19
2020 coronavirus pandemic in the United States
An ongoing worldwide pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a novel infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was first confirmed to have spread to the United States in January 2020.
Cases have been confirmed in all 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, and all inhabited U.S. territories except American Samoa and the Northern Mariana Islands.
As of March 22, the U.S. has the second highest number of active cases in the world (26,382), only after Italy (42,681).The first known case of COVID-19 in the U.S. was confirmed on January 20, 2020, in a 35-year-old man who had returned from Wuhan, China five days earlier.
The White House Coronavirus Task Force was established on January 29.
Two days later, the Trump administration declared a public health emergency and announced restrictions on travelers arriving from China.
The government first began testing persons for the virus infection in February, but soon after, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that the test kits were defective and gave inaccurate readings, thus rendering them useless.
This was followed by the government announcing a series of measures intended to speed up testing.
As of March 20, 2020 100,000 tests were conducted, but still insufficient.
Private companies have begun to ship hundreds of thousands of tests.
Drive-through testing stations are starting all over the country.The CDC warned that widespread transmission may force large numbers of people to seek hospitalization and other healthcare, which may overload healthcare systems.
As of March 19, 2020 the Department of State advices U.S. citizens to avoid all international travel.
The U.S. government has advised against any gathering of more than 10 people.Responses to the outbreak have included prohibitions and cancellation of large-scale gatherings, including the closure of schools and other educational institutions, the cancellation of trade shows, conventions, music festivals, and the cancellation and suspension of sporting events and leagues.
As of March 8,  the CDC has advised against non-essential travel to China, Iran, Malaysia, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and the 26 European countries that comprise the Schengen Area.
The United States is also denying entry to foreign nationals who have traveled through China, Iran, or the aforementioned European regions within the past 14 days.
Americans returning home after traveling in these regions have been required to undergo a health screening and submit to a 14-day quarantine.
Quarantines are governed by section 361 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S. Code § 264).On March 11 after the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak to be a pandemic
As of March 14, all 50 states were able to perform tests, with a doctor's approval, either from the CDC or from commercial labs in a state, but the number of available test kits remained very limited, which means that the true number of people currently infected with the virus is impossible to estimate with any reasonable accuracy.
The CDC has suggested that doctors use their own judgment along with certain guidelines before authorizing a test.
By March 12, diagnosed cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. exceeded 1,000, which doubled every two days to reach more than 17,000 cases by March 20.Of the 154 deaths in the country prior to March 20, 94 occurred in the state of Washington, with 35 of those at one nursing home.
The early phases of public health efforts for epidemics and pandemics are to contain or limit further outbreaks.
Those actions will often involve tracing contacts, implementing quarantines, and isolating infectious cases.
They will demand significant human resources and government staffing at all levels.
As an outbreak grows, new facilities may need to be constructed to manage additional infectious cases.National medical organizations like the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) focus on both containment to first keep the virus from spreading after its detection, and mitigation, to prevent it from spreading quickly beyond containment limits.
The process of mitigating the coronavirus pandemic is needed to extend its time frame by spreading out cases and isolating individuals, which slows the spread of the disease.
By that means, it lowers the peak, or number of new cases, which reduces the likelihood of suddenly over-crowding doctor’s offices and hospitals beyond their capacity.The risk of a truly global pandemic is limited for some diseases, such as Ebola, because of the slow pace of transmission or high probability of detection and containment.
While the new coronavirus is at the other extreme, being a pathogen that has high potential to cause a severe pandemic, especially due to its easy ability to transmit between people and to remain asymptomatic for a long period, thereby lengthening the time it is infectious and not detected.As part of the early efforts to contain and mitigate the pandemic, Surgeon General Jerome Adams announced in early March that that local leaders would soon have to consider whether to cancel large gatherings, consider telework policies, and close schools.
Over the next few weeks, a number of states had already imposed lockdown measures of different scope and severity, which placed limits on where people can travel, work and shop away from their homes.By March 21, Governors in New York, California and other large states, had ordered most businesses to shut and people to stay inside, with limited exceptions.
The order in New York, for instance, exempts financial institutions, some retailers, pharmacies, hospitals, manufacturing plants and transportation companies, among others.
It placed a ban non-essential gatherings of any size and for any reason.
On January 29, 2020, a White House Coronavirus Task Force was established to coordinate and oversee efforts to "monitor, prevent, contain, and mitigate the spread" of the pandemic in the United States.
Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar was appointed as the leader of the task force.
The following month President Trump appointed Vice President Mike Pence to take charge of the nation's response to the virus.
On February 16, 14 evacuees from the Diamond Princess cruise ship were flown on State Department-chartered planes from Japan to the United States.
The CDC, along with President Donald Trump, "did not want 14 people who had tested positive for the new coronavirus to be flown back to the US, among hundreds of other uninfected people—but the CDC experts were overruled by officials at the US State Department."
Trump reportedly expressed fury at his officials for their decision to bring the infected patients to US soil without his approval.As of March 12, the CDC recommends against non-essential travel to China, most of Europe, Iran, Malaysia, and South Korea.
As of March 11, the CDC recommends against any non-essential travel by older adults or anyone with a serious chronic condition.
On March 19, the U.S. Department of State recommended that U.S. citizens should not travel abroad, while those who are abroad should "arrange for immediate return to the United States" unless prepared to remain abroad indefinitely.As of March 20, the United States is barring entry to foreign nationals who have been in China, Iran, or 28 European countries within the past 14 days.
American citizens, permanent residents, and their immediate families returning from abroad can re-enter the United States, but those returning from one of the countries must undergo health screenings and submit to quarantine and monitoring for up to 14 days.
Flights from these countries are required to land at one of 13 airports where the Department of Homeland Security has "enhanced" entry screenings.Homeland Security Department data indicates that 241 foreigners were denied entry to the United States between February 2 and March 3: 14 at airports and 227 at land-based ports of entry.
An additional 106 foreigners had been denied entry at preclearance facilities outside the United States.
Public Safety Canada reported that 70 Canadian citizens and 47 permanent residents, all non-U.S. persons, were denied entry into the United States through March 2.On March 19, the State Department suspended routine visa services at all American embassies and consulates worldwide.
China: On February 2, the United States began to deny travel to the country by foreign nationals who had recently traveled to China.
Iran: On February 2, the United States began to deny travel to the country by foreign nationals who had recently traveled to Iran.
US citizens and permanent residents returning to the United States who have traveled to Iran within the previous 14 days must enter through an approved airport.
European Union: On March 11, 2020, a presidential proclamation was issued to add countries within the European Union's Schengen area (an area of 26 European states with no border control for those travelling within them) to the entry restrictions for 30 days beginning at 23:59 ET on March 13.
Cargo and trading goods are not affected.
United Kingdom: On March 14, Mike Pence announced that the travel ban would be expanded to include the UK and Ireland beginning at midnight ET on March 16.
Long and crowded lines were reported at airports the next day as they began to enforce enhanced entry screenings.
Illinois governor JB Pritzker addressed the long lines at O'Hare International Airport on Twitter, stating that they were unacceptable and that they needed to "get their s@#t [sic] together, NOW".
Pritzker stated that later in the night, he had received an angry phone call from a White House staff member about the previous remarks.
Ireland
Canada: On March 18, Trump stated that the government had mutually agreed with Canada to close their border to non-essential traffic.
Mexico: On March 20, Mexico and the US agreed to prohibit recreational and tourist travel, starting at midnight, until April 20.
The purposes of testing are to tell whether a person has a coronavirus infection, and to let health professionals know both how bad the epidemic is and where it is worst.Although the U.S. government was initially quick to develop a diagnostic test for the coronavirus, American testing efforts from mid-January to late-February lost pace compared to the rest of the world.
When the World Health Organization distributed 1.4 million coronavirus tests in February, the U.S. chose instead to use its own tests.
At that time, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had produced 160,000 coronavirus tests, but soon it was discovered that many were defective and gave inaccurate readings.
As a result, less than 4,000 tests were conducted in the U.S. by February 27, with U.S. state laboratories only conducting around 200.
In this period, academic laboratories and hospitals had developed their own tests, but were not allowed to use them until February 29, when the Food and Drug Administration issued approvals for them and private companies.On March 4, FDA commissioner Stephen Hahn estimated that close to a million tests would soon be able to be performed with the new test kits, while Vice President Mike Pence estimated it could be as many as 1.5 million.
But Senator Chris Murphy of Connecticut and representative Stephen Lynch of Massachusetts both noted that as of March 8, their states had not yet received the new test kits.
By March 11, "just over 5,000 people have been tested in the United States since January 20, when the first positive case was detected."As of March 12, all 50 states were able to perform tests, with a doctor's approval, either from the CDC or from commercial labs in a state.
This was followed by the government announcing a series of measures intended to speed up testing.
These measures included the appointment of Admiral Brett Giroir of the U.S. Public Health Service to oversee testing, funding for two companies developing rapid tests, and a hotline to help labs find needed supplies.
The FDA also gave emergency authorization for New York to obtain an automated coronavirus test unit that will reduce the testing time to 3.5 hours.The CDC has suggested that doctors use their own judgment along with certain guidelines before authorizing a test, since the symptoms of coronavirus closely resemble those from the flu and common cold, and persons who are only mildly ill are encouraged to stay home.
Among the factors that doctors would consider before authorizing a test for someone with symptoms are the following:
Has the patient recently traveled in an affected area?
Has the patient been in close contact with someone with COVID-19 or with patients with pneumonia of unknown cause?
Does the patient reside in an area where there has been community spread of COVID-19?The timing and availability of testing varies across countries.
For example, by March 13 South Korea offered drive-through testing centers, which could get results the next day.
South Korea also had a government-funded daily testing capacity of 15,000.Critics say that the US government has botched the approval and distribution of test kits, losing crucial time during the early weeks of the outbreak, with the result that the true number of cases in the United States was impossible to estimate with any reasonable accuracy.In a press conference on March 13, the Trump administration stated that tests would be conducted in retail store parking lots across the country, with participating franchises including Walmart, Target, CVS, and Walgreens.
Trump added that the results would be sent to labs to complete testing in partnership with local health departments and diagnostic labs.
President Trump said: "We therefore expect up to a half a million additional tests will be available early next week.
We'll be announcing locations probably on Sunday night.
[...]
The FDA's goal is to hopefully authorize their application within 24 hours [...] which will bring, additionally, 1.4 million tests on board next week and 5 million within a month."
On March 13, drive-through testing in the U.S. began in New Rochelle, Westchester County, as New Rochelle was the U.S. town with the most diagnosed cases at that time.On March 18, President Trump announced that research groups were looking into self-swab testing that, according to Trump, will be easier, less invasive, and more popular.
He expected it to free up health professionals as the test wouldn't need to be administered by health professionals.
There is currently no drug that is approved for treating COVID-19, whether as a therapy or a vaccine.
Nor is there any clear evidence that Covid-19 infection leads to immunity, although experts assume it will for a period.Among the labs working on a vaccine is the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, which has previously studied other infectious diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, Ebola and MERS.
Speed in developing a vaccine is a key element in the midst of the pandemic.
By March 18, tests had begun with a few dozen volunteers in Seattle, Washington, which was sponsored by the U.S. government.
Similar safety trials of other coronavirus vaccines will begin soon in the U.S. Trials are also underway in China and Europe.
The search for a vaccine has taken on aspects of national security and global competition, giving a nationalistic element to whichever country develops one first.
It is assumed that the country which patents it would provide it initially to its own population and subsequently profit from its distribution to other countries.As for therapies to treat the disease, President Trump has directed the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to accelerate the testing and possible use of some unapproved medications to find out if they would help treat coronavirus patients.
Among potential drugs, are chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, which have long been used successfully to treat malaria.
Both hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are currently being used to treat coronavirus patients by a number of physicians with the limited approval of the FDA, which is allowing it as a compassionate use, although still under investigation.In China, trials of chloroquine are already underway at dozens of clinics, with early results showing that it seemed to cut down the virus’ rate of replication.
Chrloroquine has a number of advantages, in that it’s already known to be safe in humans (though it can result in poisoning at overdose levels), and has been used to treat patients with malaria for nearly a century.
And in pre-clinical research, it has been effective against viral infections such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and HIV.Like chloroquine, the closely-related drug hydroxychloroquine, has already been established as safe for use in humans as it’s been on the market since the 1950s to treat certain autoimmune diseases like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.
Doctors are already testing it in COVID-19 patients.
Researchers in France have found it be effective after testing it on 24 patients with coronavirus, with the result that after six days, the virus had disappeared in three-quarters of people treated.
The French laboratory, Sanofi, said it could provide millions of doses, enough to treat 300,000 patients if effective.
And the Israeli company, Teva Pharmaceuticals, said it planned to manufacture and donate ten million doses to U.S. hospitals at no charge.Also being tested in research clinics is the antiviral drug remdesivir.
It was developed to fight Ebola, and although it failed to prove effective, it has since been shown to have some effect against both MERS and SARS.Due to the emergency nature of the pandemic, former FDA commissioners Drs.
Scott Gottlieb and Mark McClellan have called for the FDA to develop therapeutics and vaccines that would be exempt from some regulatory requirements.
On February 24, 2020, the Trump administration asked Congress for $2.5 billion in emergency funding to combat the outbreak.
Shortly after Trump's request, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer unveiled a plan providing "$8.5 billion in emergency funding".
By March 4, Congress had reached a bipartisan agreement for $8.3 billion in funding to fight the coronavirus via the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020 (HR 6074).
The bill passed the House by a 415–2 vote and the Senate with a 96–1 vote.
The deal includes "more than $3 billion for the research and development of vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics, as well as $2.2 billion for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, including $950 million to support state and local health agencies."
President Trump signed the bill into law on March 6.After the March 11 Oval Office address, senators Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi criticized the president for not addressing the lack of testing kits, and said they would request that all testing be free of cost.
They would also ask that paid emergency leave and food assistance be provided to affected employees.
In a vote that concluded at 12:30 am on Saturday March 14, 2020, the House passed the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (HR 6201) in a 363–40–1 vote after President Trump had tweeted in support of it.
The bill provides for free coronavirus testing, "paid emergency leave and other resources intended to help stem the crisis and stabilize financial markets."
The bill was sent to the Senate on March 16 after undergoing technical corrections, and was approved on March 18 with a vote of 90–8; President Trump signed the bill later that day.Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and the White House have proposed a third stimulus package which could cost over $1 trillion, including $300 billion to help small businesses with forgivable loans up to $10 million and $200 billion to support industries such as airlines, cruise companies, and hotels through loans and other measures.
It has been suggested that $200–500 billion would fund tax rebate checks to Americans who made between $2,500–$75,000 in 2018 to help cover short-term costs; this would be amount to one or two payments of $600–1,200 per adult and $500 per child.
Separately, Democratic senators have prepared a package that would cost $750 billion or more as a counter-offer to the Republican plan.
Senate Democratic Leader Charles Schumer has argued in favor of expanding unemployment benefits instead of sending out tax rebates.
A compromise between the two plans reportedly sets aside $250 billion for tax rebates and the same amount for unemployment.
Further, Democrats have advocated for increasing monthly Social Security benefits, veterans assistance, and Supplemental Security Income by $200 monthly until the end of 2021.The U.S. House Committee on Financial Services, chaired by Representative Maxine Waters, released a stimulus proposal on March 18, in which "The Federal Reserve would be directed through a money-financed fiscal program, to fund [monthly] automatic stabilizers in the form of at least $2,000 for every adult and an additional $1000 for every child for the duration of the crisis.
Adults would be eligible to withdraw these funds from financial institutions or receive them directly in the mail via the IRS."
Other elements included suspending all consumer and small business credit payments (e.g., credit cards, mortgages, student loans, small business and personal loans), reimbursing "creditors, and servicers for lost revenue and expenses, including payment advances".On March 18, Representative Rashida Tlaib proposed the "Automatic BOOST to Communities Act", which would involve sending pre-loaded $2,000 debit cards to every American, with $1,000 monthly payments thereafter until the economy recovers.
This would be funded by the U.S. Treasury minting two trillion-dollar coins.
According to Tlaib, the Treasury has this authority, and it would not increase the national debt.
On March 3, 2020, the Federal Reserve lowered target interest rates from 1.75% to 1.25%, the largest emergency rate cut since the 2008 global financial crisis, in an attempt to counteract the outbreak's effect on the American economy.
"The coronavirus poses evolving risks to economic activity," the Federal Reserve said in a statement.
"In light of these risks and in support of achieving its maximum employment and price stability goals, the Federal Open Market Committee decided today to lower the target range for the federal funds rate."On March 11, during his Oval Office address, Trump announced that he had requested a number of other policy changes:
He would ask Congress to provide financial relief and paid sick leave for workers who were quarantined or had to care for others.
He would instruct the Small Business Administration (SBA) to provide loans to businesses affected by the pandemic, and would ask Congress for an additional $50 billion to help hard-hit businesses.
He would request that tax payments be deferred beyond April 15 without penalty for those affected, which he said could add $200 billion in temporary liquidity to the economy.
He would ask Congress to provide payroll tax relief to those affected.On March 15, the Fed cut their target interest rate again to a range of 0% to 0.25%.
The Fed also announced a $700 billion quantitative easing program similar to the one initiated during the financial crisis of 2007–08.
Despite the moves, stock index futures plunged, triggering trading limits to prevent panic selling.
The Dow lost nearly 13% the next day, the third-largest one-day decline in the 124-year history of the index.
That day, the VIX — informally known as the market "fear index" — closed at the highest level since its inception in 1990.On March 17, the Federal Reserve announced a program to buy as much as $1 trillion in corporate commercial paper to ensure credit continued flowing in the economy.
The measure was backed by $10 billion in Treasury funds.
At this point, the federal government neared agreement on an economic stimulus proposal totaling about $1 trillion, including direct cash payments to Americans.
Trump stated that his administration was working with the Congress to provide rapid relief to affected industries.
He remarked that the relief would ensure the American economy would emerge as the strongest on earth.
In addition, Trump announced that Small Business Administration would be providing disaster loans that could provide impacted businesses with up to $2 million.
On March 18, Trump announced that the Department of Housing and Urban Development would be suspending all kinds of foreclosures and evictions until the end of April.
He also invoked the Defense Production Act to boost production of ventilators, masks, gloves, gowns and other items needed to protect medical personnel from exposure.
Trump remarked that that federal government purchased 500 million N-95 masks to make more private masks available and that American manufacturers were repurposing factories to manufacture masks.On March 18, the Navy deployed two hospital ships, USNS Mercy and USNS Comfort, to assist potentially overwhelmed counties with acute patient care.
Trump stated that the ships were getting ready to go to New York, on the request of Governor Cuomo.On March 20, Trump announced that the Department of Education will not be enforcing standardized testing for 2020.
Trump had also instructed to waive all federally held student loans for the next 60 days, which could be extended if needed.
Secretary of Treasury Steven Mnuchin have also announced that all tax filings deadline is moved to July 15.
From January 2020 to mid-March 2020, President Trump downplayed the threat posed by the coronavirus to the United States, giving many optimistic public statements, which may have been aimed at calming stock markets.
He initially said that he had no worries about the coronavirus becoming a pandemic.
He went to state on multiple occasions that the situation was "under control", and gave assurances that the country was already overcoming the outbreak.
Other repeated suggestions were that the virus would suddenly vanish.
While commending his administration's response, Trump focused on the relatively low number of confirmed cases at the time compared to other countries, as proof of the success of his travel restriction on China.
He stated his preference that infected cruise ship passengers not disembark as he did not want "to have the [U.S. case] numbers double because of one ship".
On March 11, 2020, Trump delivered an Oval Office address on national television, just hours after the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus a global pandemic, which caused a quick fall in financial markets.
It was the second such address to the country of his presidency, the first being on January 2019, addressing illegal immigration.
In his speech, Trump declared that the United States was "suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next 30 days", except travel from the United Kingdom, and including "the tremendous amount of trade and cargo" (post-speech, Trump stated that trade was still approved, while administration officials clarified that "American citizens or legal permanent residents or their families" were not affected).
Trump also listed several economic policy proposals, and declared that insurance companies "have agreed to waive all co-payments for coronavirus treatments" (post-speech, America’s Health Insurance Plans clarified the waivers were only for tests, not treatments).
Trump praised his administration's response to the "foreign" virus while blaming the European Union, stating that "a large number of new clusters in the United States were seeded by travelers from Europe".On March 16, Trump eventually changed his tone on the outbreak to a somber one.
For the first time, he acknowledged that the coronavirus was "not under control", the situation was "bad" with months of impending disruption to daily lives, and a recession might occur.
Also on that day, Trump began referring to the coronavirus as the "Chinese virus".
As a result, he was criticized by the Chinese Foreign Ministry and a senior World Health Organization official that the term creates stigma against Chinese and Asians.
Trump disagreed with the criticism, and defended himself: "China tried to say at one point — maybe they stopped — that it was caused by American soldiers.
That can't happen."On March 17, "I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic."
On March 18, President Trump and the Coronavirus Task Force released new recommendations based on CDC guidelines for Americans, titled "15 Days to Slow the Spread of the Coronavirus."
Trump stated, "We are at war with an invisible enemy, but that enemy is no match for the spirit and resolve of the American people."
He also stated that America will achieve total victory against the "invisible enemy", and called Americans to sacrifice together.
During the early stages of the outbreak, Trump administration officials gave mixed assessments of the seriousness of the coronavirus outbreak.
CDC Director Robert Redfield said in late January that "the immediate risk to the American public is low", then in late February stated it would be "prudent to assume this pathogen will be with us for some time to come."
While federal economic policy chief Larry Kudlow was declaring the coronavirus spread being contained "pretty close to airtight" in late February, Nancy Messonnier (head of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases) and Anthony Fauci (head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) warned of the impending community spread of the virus in the United States, with Messonnier stating: "Disruption to everyday life might be severe".
Around this point, Stephen Hahn, the head of the Food and Drug Administration, warned of national medical supplies being disrupted due to the outbreak.
Later in early March, the U.S. Surgeon General, Jerome Adams, declared that "this is likely going to get worse before it gets better".In February 2020, the CDC was notifying the press that it was expecting the infections to spread, and urged local governments, businesses, and schools to develop plans for the outbreak.
Among the suggested preparations were canceling mass gatherings, switching to teleworking, and planning for continued business operations in the face of increased absenteeism or disrupted supply chains.CDC officials warned that widespread transmission may force large numbers of people to seek hospitalization and other healthcare, which may overload healthcare systems.
Public health officials stressed that local governments would need assistance from the federal government if there were school and business closures.
As coronavirus was spreading to several prisons in the US, some states and local jurisdictions began to release prisoners considered vulnerable to the virus.
Economic analysts revised their forecasts downward going into March, with Goldman Sachs estimating on March 20 that the economy could contract by as much as 24% during the second quarter of 2020, following their 5% decline estimate just four days earlier.
Some analysts estimated a recession had already begun.
As the outbreak intensified, demand for domestic air travel declined steeply.
By March 4, U.S. airlines, including United Airlines and JetBlue Airways, began to reduce their domestic flight schedules, offering voluntary unpaid leave to personnel, and freezing hiring.
In an interview with CNBC on March 5, Southwest Airlines CEO Gary Kelly reported "a very noticeable, precipitous decline in bookings" since the outbreak began, remarking that the outbreak's impact on domestic air travel had "a 9/11-like feel" reminiscent of an economic recession.
On March 10, American Airlines and Delta Air Lines also announced cuts to their domestic flight schedules, while United Airlines reported that it expects to take a loss in the first quarter of 2020 rather than profits that the carrier previously expected.
Furthermore, United Airlines announced $2.5 billion in reductions to capital spending, while Delta Air Lines reported that it planned to defer $500 million in capital spending as well as retire portions of its fleet ahead of schedule.
Globally, the International Air Transport Association estimated that the global outbreak could reduce airline revenues by between $63 billion and $113 billion, including nearly $21 billion in the US and Canada.On March 8, Amtrak suspended its three daily non-stop high-speed Acela Express trains between Washington, D.C., and New York City beginning on March 10 and continuing until May 26, citing "reduced demand for our service."
The same day, Amtrak announced that on March 4, one of its passengers on train 303 (Chicago to St. Louis) had tested positive, the first such case on the U.S. rail system.
Amtrak took the train out of service, disinfected the St. Louis and Chicago stations, and notified the other passengers on that train.
On March 13, Amtrak announced that effective March 16 through March 29, trains along the Northeast Corridor will operate on a reduced schedule.
In addition, effective March 16 through March 29 the Keystone Service will operate on a Saturday schedule between Philadelphia and Harrisburg, with no service to stations in Montgomery and Chester counties.
The Hartford Line and Valley Flyer will also operate on a Saturday schedule starting March 16.
In New York, effective March 15 the Maple Leaf will only operate between New York City and Niagara Falls while the Adirondack will only operate between New York City and Albany.
The Winter Park Express train in Colorado was cancelled for the rest of the season.The lobbying group for the airline industry, Airlines for America (A4A), on March 16 called for a $50 billion subsidy, including $4 billion for cargo services.
CNBC reports that airlines are preparing for a ban on domestic flights after President Trump said on March 14 that he is considering travel curbs and acting Homeland Security Secretary Chad Wolf said all options remained on the table when asked about a possible ban, the first since September 11, 2001.
United Airlines said they expected a drop of $1.5 billion in March revenue, American Airlines said they expected to decrease domestic capacity by 20% in April and 30% in May, and Delta Air Lines told employees it would cut capacity by 40%.Several of the largest mass transit operators in the U.S. have reduced service in response to lower demand caused by work from home policies and self-quarantines.
The loss of fares and sales tax, a common source of operating revenue, is predicted to cause long-term effects on transit expansion and maintenance.
The American Public Transportation Association issued a request for $13 billion in emergency funding from the federal government to cover lost revenue and other expenses incurred by the pandemic.
Many localities reported an increase in bicycling as residents sought socially distant means of getting around.
On February 27, 2020, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) dropped 1,191 points, the largest single-day point drop in the index's history at the time; some attributed the drop to anxiety about the epidemic.
The same day, the S&P 500 logged a 4.4% decline.
Since then, the record has been beaten five more times during the outbreak on March 9 (-2,013 points), March 11 (-1,465 points), March 12 (-2,353 points), and finally setting the current record for most points lost in a single day by losing 2,997 points on March 16.
It once again fell another 1,338 points on March 18.
On March 13, the stock market rebounded for the single largest one-day point gain in the market's history by gaining 1,985 points after Trump declared a state of national emergency to free up resources to combat the virus.
The six business days it took for the S&P 500 Index to drop 10% (from February 20 to 27) "marked the quickest 10% decline from an all-time high in the index's history."
From January 21 to March 1, the DJIA dropped more than 3,500 points, equating to roughly a 13% decrease.Stock index futures declined sharply during Trump's March 11 address, and the Dow Jones declined 10% the following day — the largest daily decline since Black Monday in 1987 — despite the Federal Reserve also announcing it would inject $1.5 trillion into money markets.By March 18, investors were shunning even assets considered safe havens during economic crises, such as government bonds and gold, moving into cash positions.
By March 20, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was below the level when President Trump was inaugurated on January 20, 2017, having fallen 35% from its February peak.
The number of persons filing for unemployment insurance increased from 211,000 the week ending March 7, to 281,000 for the week ending March 14, an increase of 70,000 or 33%, the largest percent increase since 1992.
Just part way through the following week, 15 states had reported nearly 630,000 claims.
Goldman Sachs forecast that over 2 million people would file the week of March 21, an unprecedented number.
Goldman also forecast that the unemployment rate could rise towards 9% over the second and third quarters, with much depending on the specifics of government stimulus plans.
In February 2020, the American companies Apple Inc. and Microsoft began lowering expectations for revenue because of supply chain disruptions in China caused by the virus.
In a February 27 note to clients, Goldman Sachs stated that it expects no earnings growth for U.S. companies in 2020 as a result of the virus, at a time when the consensus forecast of Wall Street expected "earnings to climb 7%."
On March 20, 2020 as part of an SEC filing, AT&T cancelled all stock buyback plans included a plan to repurchase stock worth $4 billion during the second quarter.
The reasons AT&T gave for the cancellation was to invest the money into its networks and in taking care of its employees during the pandemic.The pandemic, along with the resultant stock market crash and other impacts, has led to increased discussion of a recession in the United States.
Experts differ on whether a recession will actually take place, with some saying it's not inevitable while others say the country may already be in a recession.
Of the economists surveyed in March by the University of Chicago at multiple U.S. universities, 51% agreed or strongly agreed that there would be a "major" recession caused by the coronavirus, while 31% were uncertain or disagreed.In response to the economic damage caused by the pandemic, some economists have advocated for financial support from the government for individual Americans and for banks and businesses.
Others have objected to intervention by the government on the grounds that it would alter the role of the Federal Reserve and enshrine moral hazard as a defining market principle.
As of March 20, 114,000 public schools had closed nationwide, affecting nearly 53 million students, and 45 states had closed schools statewide.
To ensure food-insecure students continued to receive lunches while schools were closed, many states and school districts arranged for "grab-and-go" lunch bags or used school bus routes to deliver meals to children.
To provide legal authority for such efforts, the U.S. Department of Agriculture waived several school lunch program requirements.A large number of higher educational institutions canceled classes and closed dormitories in response to the outbreak, including Harvard University, Cornell University, and the University of South Carolina.
Virtually all colleges and universities have extended remote classes until the end of the spring semester and several have proactively cancelled graduation ceremonies.Due to the disruption to the academic year caused by the coronavirus, the U.S. Department of Education approved a waiver process, allowing states to opt-out of standardized testing required under the Every Student Succeeds Act.
In addition, the College Board eliminated traditional face-to-face Advanced Placement exams in favor of an online exam that can be taken at home.
The College Board also cancelled SAT testing in March and May in response to the pandemic.
Similarly, April ACT exams were rescheduled for June 2020.The Department of Education also authorized limited student loan relief, allowing borrowers to suspend payments for at least two months without accurring interest.
Alameda County: On March 20, Alameda County officials announced that 247 people would be released from Santa Rita Jail, located in Dublin.
Los Angeles County: On March 17, the county Sheriff's Department announced that it had reduced the inmate population by 600 during the previous two weeks in an attempt to protect prisoners from coronavirus.
San Diego County: On March 16, the Sheriff's Department said it had started reducing the number of people being accepted into the county's seven jails and had received approval for early release of some prisoners.
Other measures included in-cell meals, a suspension of visitation, and suspension of jail programs.
The Georgia Department of Corrections (DOC) suspended visitations and announced additional sanitation measures, but the Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported that inmates had seen no extra soap.
A prison worker was confirmed to have the coronavirus on March 18 — the DOC, citing "security and HIPAA restrictions", declined to name the affected prison.
The first detected case on COVID-19 in a prison inmate was at Lee State Prison two days later, on March 20.
The Michigan Department of Corrections banned visitors to prisons, along with prohibiting any volunteers from the prison.
Staff at prisons will be required to have their temperature tested and be proven to be under 100.4 °F (38.0 °C) along with other measures.
The Michigan Career and Technical Institute suspended all programs until April 5.
The first COVID-19 positive case in the Wisconsin state prison system, an employee at Waupun Correctional Institution, was reported on March 18 by warden Brian Foster.
Inmate advocacy groups called on the Department of Corrections and Governor Tony Evers to change prison policies to protect prisoners and guards during the epidemic.
As "social distancing" entered the public lexicon, emergency management leaders encouraged the cancellation of large gatherings to slow the rate of infection.
Technology conferences such as Apple Inc.'s Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC), E3 2020, Facebook F8, Google I/O and Cloud Next, and Microsoft's MVP Summit have been either cancelled or have replaced in-person events with internet streaming events.
On February 21, Verizon pulled out of an RSA conference, joining the ranks of AT&T Cybersecurity and IBM.
On February 29, the American Physical Society cancelled its annual March Meeting, scheduled for March 2 to 6 in Denver, Colorado, even though many of the more than 11,000 physicist participants had already arrived and participated in the day's pre-conference events.
On March 6, the annual South by Southwest (SXSW) conference and festival scheduled to run from March 13 to 22 in Austin, Texas, were cancelled following after the city government declared a "local disaster" and ordered conferences to shut down for the first time in 34 years.
The cancellation is not covered by insurance.
In 2019, 73,716 people attended the conferences and festivals, directly spending $200 million and ultimately boosting the local economy by $356 million, or 4 percent of the annual revenue of the region's hospitality and tourism economic sectors.After the cancellations of the Ultra Music Festival in Miami and SXSW in Austin, speculation began to grow about the Coachella festival set to begin on April 10 in the desert in Indio, California.
The annual festival, which has attracted some 125,000 people over two consecutive weekends, is insured only in the event of a force majeure cancellation such as one ordered by local or state government officials.
Estimates on an insurance payout range from $150 million to $200 million.
On March 10, event organizers announced the festival had been postponed to October.
FIRST Robotics suspended the remainder of the 2020 competition season, and cancelled the two Championship events in Houston and Detroit.
The 2019-2020 coronavirus pandemic impacted the restaurant industry worldwide via government closures, resulting in layoffs of workers and loss of income for restaurants and owners.
The US restaurant industry was projected to have $899 billion in sales for 2020 by the National Restaurant Association, the main trade association for the industry in the United States.
The industry as a whole as of February of 2020 employed more than 15 million people, representing 10% of the workforce directly.
It indirectly employed close to another 10% when dependent businesses such as food producers, trucking, and delivery services were factored in, according to Ohio restaurateur Britney Ruby Miller.On March 15, Ohio Governor Mike DeWine and Ohio Health Department director Amy Acton ordered the closure of all bars and restaurants to help slow the spread of the virus, saying the government "encouraged restaurants to offer carryout or delivery service, but they would not be allowed to have people congregating in the businesses."
The next day, Illinois, New York, New Jersey, and Maryland followed suit.Groups of restaurateurs in New York City and Cincinnati called on governments to provide help to the nation's small and independent restaurants.
On March 19 the New York group called for state governments to issue orders for rent abatements, suspension of sales and payroll taxes, and a full shutdown so that business interruption insurance coverage would be triggered.
On March 20 the Cincinnati group called on the federal government to provide a $225 bailout to the restaurant industry.Several restaurant chains altered their operating procedures to prevent the spread of the virus, including removing seating, restricting the use of condiments, and switching to mobile payment systems.
Many restaurants opted to close their dining rooms and instead switch to solely take-out food service to comply with social distancing recommendations.
A number of retailers, particularly grocery stores, reduced their opening hours to allow additional time to restock and deep-clean their stores.
Major stores such as Walmart, Apple, Nike, Albertson's and Trader Joe's, also shortened their hours.
Some grocery store chains, including Stop & Shop and Dollar General, devoted a portion of their operating hours to serve only senior citizens.To prevent hoarding, many supermarkets and retailers placed limits on certain products such as toilet paper, hand sanitizer, over-the-counter medication, and cleaning supplies.
However, the Food Marketing Institute announced that its supply chain was not strained and all products would be available in the future.
Since consumers were increasingly relying on online retailers, Amazon planned to hire another 100,000 warehouse and delivery workers and raise wages $2 per hour through April.
They also reported shortages of certain household staples.A March 21st article in the Chicago Tribune reported that employees at UPS, FedEx, and XPO often have been pressured not to take time off, even with symptoms such as fever and cough consistent with Coronavirus.
Public health authorities state that the risk is relatively low to customers receiving packages, in part because Coronavirus does nt live for very long on cardboard, but it most certainly is a danger for employees on crowded conveyor belts.
The scale of the coronavirus outbreak has prompted several major publishers to temporarily disable their paywalls on related articles, including Bloomberg News, The Atlantic, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and The Seattle Times.Several alt weekly newspapers in affected metropolitan areas, including The Stranger in Seattle and Austin Chronicle, have announced layoffs and funding drives due to lost revenue.
Public events and venues accounted for a majority of revenue for alt-weekly newspapers, which was disrupted by the cancellation of large public gatherings.
Most U.S. cinema chains, where allowed to continue operating, reduced the seating capacity of each show time by half to minimize the risk of spreading the virus between patrons.
Audience limits, as well as mandatory and voluntary closure of cinemas in some areas, led to a total North American box office sales the lowest since October 1998.
On March 16, numerous theater chains temporarily closed their locations nationwide.
A number of Hollywood film companies have suspended production and delayed the release of some films.
In March, a number of studio-based talk shows and game shows announced plans to film behind closed doors with no audience.
Some television networks and news channels have adjusted their programming to incorporate coverage of the pandemic and adhere to CDC guidelines, including encouraging remote work and social distancing on-air (including separation between on-air anchors and increased use of remote interviews).Quarantine and remote work efforts, as well as interest in updates on the pandemic, have resulted in a larger potential audience for television broadcasters, especially news channels.
Nielsen estimated that by March 11, television usage had increased by 22% week-over-week.
It was expected that streaming services would see an increase in usage, while potential economic downturns associated with the pandemic could accelerate the market trend of cord cutting.
Four of North America's major professional sports leagues—Major League Baseball (MLB), the National Basketball Association (NBA), National Hockey League (NHL), and Major League Soccer (MLS)—jointly announced on March 9 that they would all restrict media access to player facilities (such as locker rooms) to control possible exposure.A suspension of games for various time periods has been announced by almost all professional sports leagues in the United States, including the NHL Major League Baseball (remainder of spring training cancelled, Opening Day (indefinitely), Major League Soccer (at least 30 days), as well as Minor League Baseball, the American Hockey League (AHL), ECHL, Major League Rugby (MLR), United Soccer League (USL), National Independent Soccer Association (NISA), and National Lacrosse League (NLL).
The National Women's Soccer League (NWSL) The XFL preemptively terminated its season, with the ECHL also doing so on March 14.
Major League Rugby canceled the remainder of their 2020 season on March 19.
Several colleges announced on March 10 that attendance at university athletic events would be temporarily limited to essential personnel such as media, players, coaches, and recruits.
These schools included the USC Trojans and UCLA Bruins, both located in Los Angeles, and the Fordham Rams, located in New York City.On March 12 the NCAA shut down its annual men's and women's basketball tournaments along with wrestling championships.
It marked the first time that the men's basketball tournament would not be conducted in its 81-year history.
Organizers of the 2020 Indian Wells Masters tennis tournaments cancelled the games, noting that attendance in the last two years was around 450,000.
The ATP Tour and WTA Tour have both suspended competition until late-April, which has also led to the cancellation of the Miami Open.On March 12, NASCAR initially announced that it would hold its next two race weekends in its three national series (Cup Series, Xfinity Series, and Truck Series), at Atlanta Motor Speedway and Homestead-Miami Speedway, behind closed doors.
However, on March 13, NASCAR announced that it had postponed both weekends.
On March 16, NASCAR postponed all race events until May 3, with the intention to hold all of this season's races.
The IndyCar Series similarly announced the cancellation of all races through the end of April.
This marks the first time since the 1957 season that the "Month of May" (the lead-up to the Indianapolis 500) will start the season.The United States Hockey League, the top junior hockey league, canceled the remainder of the season and playoffs on March 18.The PGA Tour played the first round of the 2020 Players Championship on March 12, and stated that subsequent rounds and tournaments would be held without spectators.
However, the PGA Tour later announced that, "based on the rapidly changing situation", the rest of the tournament had been cancelled, as well as the next three events on the schedule (the Valspar Championship, WGC Match Play, and Valero Texas Open).
The LPGA Tour has also postponed the Volvik Founders Cup, Kia Classic, and ANA Inspiration (the first Women's major of the golf season).
On March 13, Augusta National Golf Club announced that it would postpone the Masters Tournament—the first men's major of the golf season.
The tournament was to begin April 9.
The local and statewide stay-at-home orders of late March did not make exceptions for public worship services.
By March 20, every Roman Catholic diocese in the United States had suspended the public celebration of Mass and dispensed with the obligation to attend Sunday Mass, as had the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter.
The Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in the United States also suspended public Divine Liturgies.
Opinion polling showed a significant partisan divide regarding the outbreak.
A mid-March poll conducted by NBC News and The Wall Street Journal found that 60% of Democrats were concerned someone in their family might contract the virus, while 40% of Republicans expressed concern.
Nearly 80% of Democrats believed the worst was yet to come, whereas 40% of Republicans thought so.
About 56% of Democrats believed their lives would change in a major way due to the outbreak, compared to 26% for Republicans.
A mid-March poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 83% of Democrats had taken precautions against the virus, compared to 53% of Republicans.
The poll found that President Trump was the least-trusted source of information about the outbreak, at 46% overall, although 88% of Republicans expressed trust in the president, second only to their trust in the CDC.During the initial weeks of the outbreak, some prominent conservative media personalities downplayed the danger of the situation, characterizing the coverage of the virus at the time as a "scam" or "hyped" in order to disparage the president.
In a speech on February 28, Trump echoed some of these voices by calling criticism of his administration's response to the virus a "hoax" and claiming Democrats were "politicizing the coronavirus."
The United States has experienced pandemics and epidemics throughout its history, including the 1918 Spanish flu, the 1957 Asian flu, and the 1968 Hong Kong flu pandemics.
In the most recent pandemic prior to COVID-19, the  2009 H1N1 swine flu took the lives of over 12,000 Americans and hospitalized over 200,000 more.
Because of this pandemic and the 2014 Ebola epidemic, which saw only a small number of Americans infected, the Obama Administration increased planning and analysis that focused on deficiencies in the government's response to outbreaks.
In 2017, outgoing Obama administration officials briefed incoming Trump administration officials on how to respond to pandemics by using simulated scenarios, although by the time of the coronavirus outbreak in the U.S., around two-thirds of Trump administration officials at the briefing had left the administration.The United States Intelligence Community, in its annual worldwide threat assessment reports of 2017 and 2018, stated new types of microbes that are "easily transmissible between humans" remained "a major threat."
Similarly, for the 2019 worldwide threat assessment, the U.S. intelligence agencies warned that "the United States and the world will remain vulnerable to the next flu pandemic or large-scale outbreak of a contagious disease that could lead to massive rates of death and disability, severely affect the world economy, strain international resources, and increase calls on the United States for support."Citing lessons learned from the swine flu pandemic, Ebola outbreak, and the 2001 anthrax attacks, President Trump released a National Biodefense Strategy on September 18, 2018 in response to a Congressional directive.
According to Trump, the new strategy was designed to strengthen the nation’s defenses against disease outbreaks and bioterrorism and to make responses to them more efficient and better coordinated.
Concurrently, he released a National Security Presidential Memorandum that appointed the Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar to oversee implementation of the government’s new biodefense strategy and directed National Security Advisor John Bolton to assist in reviewing and improving the nation’s biodefenses.
At a time when multiple agencies and deparments shared responsbility for biodefense, Bolton and Azar claimed this centralization of oversight authority for biodefense in the Department of Health and Human Services would provide greater accountability.In 2018, Bolton reorganized the executive branch's United States National Security Council, largely merging the group responsible for global health security and biodefense into a bigger group responsible for counter-proliferation and biodefense.
Along with the reorganization, the leader of the global health security and biodefense group, Rear Admiral Timothy Ziemer, left to join another federal agency, while Tim Morrison became the leader of the combined group.
Also in 2018, Homeland Security Advisor Tom Bossert left the administration; reportedly at Bolton's request.
Bossert had helped to create the Trump administration's biodefense plans, and it was his responsibility to coordinate the government's response in the event of a biological crisis.
Bossert's successor, Doug Fears, and Fears' successor Peter J. Brown, took over the biodefense responsibilities of the Department of Homeland Security.
Bloomberg News reported in January 2020 that biodefense was by then a "less prominent" part of the Homeland Security Advisor's responsibilities.
Meanwhile, Luciana Borio, the National Security Council director for medical and biodefense preparedness, left her post in 2019.
The Washington Post reported in March 2020 that the White House would not confirm the identity of Borio's replacement.The Trump administration from January to August 2019 simulated a series of pandemic outbreaks from China and found that the U.S. government response was "underfunded, underprepared, and uncoordinated," with the "not to be disclosed" draft report detailing repeated cases of "confusion" during the exercises.
A briefing was given to the United States Congress in December 2019 of some of the findings from the exercise, including the conclusion that the U.S. could not speedily manufacture certain medical supplies to cope with demand, because many of these items were imported.
In response to the problems illustrated in the simulation, Trump issued an executive order to make flu vaccines more readily available and of higher quality, and he provided additional funds for the pandemic threats program in the Department of Health and Human Services.
The following numbers are based on CDC data.
However, CDC data is incomplete.
In most U.S. locations, testing for some time was only performed on symptomatic people with a history of travel to Wuhan or with close contact to such people.
A quarantined nurse in California, showing symptoms of COVID-19 but without a travel history, said she was denied testing by the CDC in early March.
CDC testing protocols did not include non-travelling patients with no known contact with China until February 28.The original CDC-developed tests sent out on February 5 turned out to be faulty.
On February 29, the FDA announced that labs would be allowed to do their own in-house testing immediately, independently of CDC testing, as long as they complete an emergency use authorization (EUA) within 15 days.
In Washington, state regulators at one point told health care workers to stop testing previously collected samples from an existing non-COVID19 flu study.As of March 18, the CDC reported that 37,824 specimens had been tested for COVID-19, 4,484 of which were tested by CDC labs, and 33,340 tested by U.S. public health labs.
The CDC publishes official numbers every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, reporting several categories of cases: individual travelers, people who contracted the disease from other people within the U.S., and repatriated citizens who returned to the U.S. from crisis locations, such as Wuhan, where the disease originated, and the cruise ship Diamond Princess.
The detailed breakdown of the number of cases by state and by date can be found in the template link hidden above.
NOTE: The latest entry on the charts may appear low because not all data concerning today have been received yet.
2019–20 coronavirus pandemic by country and territory
Veracity of statements by Donald Trump#Coronavirus pandemic
Footnotes
Citations
Maps and data
Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases and historical data by Johns Hopkins University
CoronaMapper – map with various updated statistics
CDC: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
CDC: Map of US cases
CDC: Newsroom on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
California CDPH Office of Public Affairs, news releases by California Department of Public Health (CDPH)
The New York Times: Tracking Every Coronavirus Case in the U.S.: Full Map
COVID-19 Self Triage Tool from University of Southern California
C-SPAN's coverage of the governmental and other responses to the coronavirus outbreak
Betacoronavirus
Betacoronaviruses (β-CoVs or Beta-CoVs) are one of four genera of coronaviruses of the subfamily Orthocoronavirinae in the family Coronaviridae, of the order Nidovirales.
They are enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses of zoonotic origin.
The coronavirus genera are each composed of varying viral lineages with the betacoronavirus genus containing four such lineages.
In older literature, this genus is also known as group 2 coronaviruses.
The Beta-CoVs of the greatest clinical importance concerning humans are OC43 and HKU1 of the A lineage, SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 (which causes the disease COVID-19) of the B lineage, and MERS-CoV of the C lineage.
MERS-CoV is the first betacoronavirus belonging to lineage C that is known to infect humans.The Alphacoronavirus and Betacoronavirus genera descend from the bat gene pool.
Alpha- and Betacoronaviruses mainly infect bats, but they also infect other species like humans, camels, and rabbits.
Beta-CoVs that have caused epidemics in humans generally induce fever and respiratory symptoms.
They include:
SARS-CoV, Severe acute respiratory syndrome.
MERS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome.
SARS-CoV-2, Coronavirus disease 2019.
Coronaviruses have a large genome size that ranges from 26 to 32 kilobases.
The overall structure of β-CoV genome is similar to that of other CoVs, with an ORF1ab replicase polyprotein (rep, pp1ab) preceding other elements.
This polyprotein is cleaved into many nonstructural proteins (see UniProt annotation of SARS rep, P0C6X7).
As of May 2013, GenBank has 46 published complete genomes of the α- (group 1), β- (group 2), γ- (group 3), and δ- (group 4) CoVs.
Within the genus Betacoronavirus (Group 2 CoV), four lineages (a, b, c, and d) are commonly recognized.
Lineage A (subgenus Embecovirus) includes HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1 (various species)
Lineage B (subgenus Sarbecovirus) includes SARSr-CoV (which includes all its strains such as SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and Bat SL-CoV-WIV1)
Lineage C (subgenus Merbecovirus) includes Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 (BtCoV-HKU4), Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5 (BtCoV-HKU5), and MERS-CoV (various species)
Lineage D (subgenus Nobecovirus) includes Rousettus bat coronavirus HKU9 (BtCoV-HKU9)The four lineages have also been named using Greek letters or numerically.
A further subgenus is Hibecovirus including Bat Hp-betacoronavirus Zhejiang2013.
The viruses of lineage A differ from all others in the genus in that they have a shorter spike-like protein called hemagglutinin esterase (HE).The name Coronavirus is derived from the Latin "corona" meaning crown or halo, referring to their image under electron microscopy of crown-like spikes on their surface similar to the solar corona.
This morphology is created by the viral spike (S) peplomers, which are proteins that populate the surface of the virus and determine host tropism.
The order Nidovirales is named for the Latin nidus, which means nest.
It refers to this order's production of a 3'-coterminal nested set of subgenomic mRNAs during infection.Several structures of the spike proteins have been resolved.
The receptor binding domain in Alpha- and Betacoronavirus spike protein is catalogued as InterPro: IPR018548.
The spike protein assembles into a trimer (PDB: 3jcl, 6acg​); its core structure resembles that of paramyxovirus F (fusion) proteins.
The receptor usage is not very conserved; for example, among Sarbecovirus, only a sub-lineage containing SARS share the ACE2 receptor.
Animal viruses
Coronaviruses
Viralzone: Betacoronavirus
Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource (ViPR): Coronaviridae
Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a viral respiratory disease of zoonotic origin caused by the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV).
Between November 2002 and July 2003, an outbreak of SARS in southern China caused an eventual 8,098 cases, resulting in 774 deaths reported in 17 countries (9.6% fatality rate), with the majority of cases in mainland China and Hong Kong.
In late 2017, Chinese scientists traced the virus through the intermediary of civets to cave-dwelling horseshoe bats in Yunnan province.
No cases of SARS have been reported worldwide since 2004.
However, the related virus SARS-CoV-2 is the cause of the ongoing 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic.
Initial symptoms are flu-like symptoms and may include fever, muscle pain, lethargy, cough, sore throat, and other nonspecific symptoms.
The only symptom common to all patients appears to be a fever above 38 °C (100 °F).
SARS may eventually lead to shortness of breath and pneumonia; either direct viral pneumonia or secondary bacterial pneumonia.The average incubation period for SARS is 4–6 days, although rarely it could be as short as 1 day or as long as 14 days.
The primary route of transmission for SARS is contact of the mucous membranes with respiratory droplets or fomites.
While diarrhea is common in people with SARS, the fecal-oral route does not appear to be a common mode of transmission.
The basic reproduction number of SARS, R0, ranges from 2 to 4 depending on different analyses.
Control measures introduced in April 2003 reduced the R0 to 0.4.
SARS may be suspected in a patient who has:
Any of the symptoms, including a fever of 38 °C (100 °F) or higher, and
Either a history of:
Contact (sexual or casual) with someone with a diagnosis of SARS within the last 10 days or
Travel to any of the regions identified by the World Health Organization (WHO) as areas with recent local transmission of SARS.For a case to be considered probable, a chest X-ray must be positive for atypical pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome.
The WHO has added the category of "laboratory confirmed SARS" for patients who would otherwise be considered "probable" but who have not yet had a positive chest X-ray changes, but have tested positive for SARS based on one of the approved tests (ELISA, immunofluorescence or PCR).The appearance of SARS in chest X-rays is not always uniform but generally appears as an abnormality with patchy infiltrates.
There is no vaccine for SARS.
Clinical isolation and quarantine remain the most effective means to prevent the spread of SARS.
Other preventive measures include:
Hand-washing
Disinfection of surfaces for fomites
Avoiding contact with bodily fluids
Washing the personal items of someone with SARS in hot, soapy water (eating utensils, dishes, bedding, etc.)
Keeping children with symptoms home from school
Simple hygiene measures
Isolating oneself as much as possible to minimize the chances of transmission of the virusMany public health interventions were made to try to control the spread of the disease, which is mainly spread through respiratory droplets in the air.
These interventions included earlier detection of the disease; isolation of people who are infected; droplet and contact precautions; and the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), including masks and isolation gowns.
Studies done during the outbreak found that for medical professionals, wearing any type of mask compared to none could reduce chances of getting sick by about 80%.
A screening process was also put in place at airports to monitor air travel to and from affected countries.SARS is most infectious in severely ill patients, which usually occurs during the second week of illness.
This delayed infectious period meant that quarantine was highly effective; people who were isolated before day five of their illness rarely transmitted the disease to others.Although no cases have been identified since 2004, the CDC was still working to make federal and local rapid response guidelines and recommendations in the event of a reappearance of the virus as of 2017.
As SARS is a viral disease, antibiotics do not have direct effect, but may be used against bacterial secondary infection.
Treatment of SARS is mainly supportive with antipyretics, supplemental oxygen and mechanical ventilation as needed.
Antiviral medications are used as well as high doses of steroids to reduce swelling in the lungs.People with SARS must be isolated, preferably in negative pressure rooms, with complete barrier nursing precautions taken for any necessary contact with these patients, to limit the chances of medical personnel getting infected with SARS.
In certain cases, natural ventilation by opening doors and windows are documented to help decreasing indoor concentration of virus particles.Some of the more serious damage caused by SARS may be due to the body's own immune system reacting in what is known as cytokine storm.As of 2020, there is no cure or protective vaccine for SARS that has been shown to be both safe and effective in humans.
According to research papers published in 2005 and 2006, the identification and development of novel vaccines and medicines to treat SARS is a priority for governments and public health agencies around the world.
In early 2004, an early clinical trial on volunteers was planned.
Several consequent reports from China on some recovered SARS patients showed severe long-time sequelae.
The most typical diseases include, among other things, pulmonary fibrosis, osteoporosis, and femoral necrosis, which have led in some cases to the complete loss of working ability or even self-care ability of people who have recovered from SARS.
As a result of quarantine procedures, some of the post-SARS patients have been documented as suffering from post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder.
SARS was a relatively rare disease; at the end of the epidemic in June 2003, the incidence was 8,422 cases with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 11%.The case fatality rate (CFR) ranges from 0% to 50% depending on the age group of the patient.
Patients under 24 were least likely to die (less than 1%); those 65 and older were most likely to die (over 55%).
The viral outbreak can be genetically traced to a colony of cave-dwelling horseshoe bats in China's Yunnan province.The SARS epidemic appears to have started in Guangdong Province, China, in November 2002 where the first case was reported that same month.
The patient, a farmer from Shunde, Foshan, Guangdong, was treated in the First People's Hospital of Foshan.
The patient died soon after, and no definite diagnosis was made on his cause of death.
Despite taking some action to control it, Chinese government officials did not inform the World Health Organization of the outbreak until February 2003.
This lack of openness caused delays in efforts to control the epidemic, resulting in criticism of the People's Republic of China from the international community.
China has since officially apologized for early slowness in dealing with the SARS epidemic.The outbreak first appeared on 27 November 2002, when Canada's Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN), an electronic warning system that is part of the World Health Organization's Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN), picked up reports of a "flu outbreak" in China through Internet media monitoring and analysis and sent them to the WHO.
While GPHIN's capability had recently been upgraded to enable Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish translation, the system was limited to English or French in presenting this information.
Thus, while the first reports of an unusual outbreak were in Chinese, an English report was not generated until 21 January 2003.
The first super-spreader was admitted to the Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital in Guangzhou on 31 January, which soon spread the disease to nearby hospitals.Subsequent to this, the WHO requested information from Chinese authorities on 5 and 11 December.
Despite the successes of the network in previous outbreak of diseases, it did not receive intelligence until the media reports from China several months after the outbreak of SARS.
Along with the second alert, WHO released the name, definition, as well as an activation of a coordinated global outbreak response network that brought sensitive attention and containment procedures.
By the time the WHO took action, over 500 deaths and an additional 2,000 cases had already occurred worldwide.In early April, after Jiang Yanyong pushed to report the danger to China, there appeared to be a change in official policy when SARS began to receive a much greater prominence in the official media.
Some have directly attributed this to the death of American James Earl Salisbury.
It was around this same time that Jiang Yanyong made accusations regarding the undercounting of cases in Beijing military hospitals.
After intense pressure, Chinese officials allowed international officials to investigate the situation there.
This revealed problems plaguing the aging mainland Chinese healthcare system, including increasing decentralization, red tape, and inadequate communication.
Many healthcare workers in the affected nations risked and lost their lives by treating patients, and trying to contain the infection before ways to prevent infection were known.
The epidemic reached the public spotlight in February 2003, when an American businessman traveling from China, Johnny Chen, became afflicted with pneumonia-like symptoms while on a flight to Singapore.
The plane stopped in Hanoi, Vietnam, where the victim died in Hanoi French Hospital.
Several of the medical staff who treated him soon developed the same disease despite basic hospital procedures.
Italian doctor Carlo Urbani identified the threat and communicated it to WHO and the Vietnamese government; he later succumbed to the disease.The severity of the symptoms and the infection among hospital staff alarmed global health authorities, who were fearful of another emergent pneumonia epidemic.
On 12 March 2003, the WHO issued a global alert, followed by a health alert by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Local transmission of SARS took place in Toronto, Ottawa, San Francisco, Ulaanbaatar, Manila, Singapore, Taiwan, Hanoi and Hong Kong whereas within China it spread to Guangdong, Jilin, Hebei, Hubei, Shaanxi, Jiangsu, Shanxi, Tianjin, and Inner Mongolia.
The disease spread in Hong Kong from Liu Jianlun, a Guangdong doctor who was treating patients at Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital.
He arrived in February and stayed on the ninth floor of the Metropole Hotel in Kowloon, infecting 16 of the hotel visitors.
Those visitors traveled to Canada, Singapore, Taiwan, and Vietnam, spreading SARS to those locations.Another larger cluster of cases in Hong Kong centred on the Amoy Gardens housing estate.
Its spread is suspected to have been facilitated by defects in its bathroom drainage system that allowed sewer gases including virus particles to vent into the room.
Bathroom fans exhausted the gases and wind carried the contagion to adjacent downwind complexes.
Concerned citizens in Hong Kong worried that information was not reaching people quickly enough and created a website called sosick.org, which eventually forced the Hong Kong government to provide information related to SARS in a timely manner.
The first cohort of affected people were discharged from hospital on 29 March 2003.
The first case of SARS in Toronto was identified on 23 February 2003.
Beginning with an elderly woman, Kwan Sui-Chu, returning from a trip to Hong Kong, the virus killed her on 5 March and eventually infected 257 individuals in the province of Ontario.
The trajectory of this outbreak is typically divided into two phases, the first centring around her son Tse Chi Kwai, who infected other patients at the Scarborough Grace Hospital and died on 13 March.
The second major wave of cases was clustered around accidental exposure among patients, visitors, and staff within the North York General Hospital.
The WHO officially removed Toronto from its list of infected areas by the end of June 2003.The official response by the Ontario provincial government and Canadian federal government has been widely criticized in the years following the outbreak.
Brian Schwartz, vice-chair of Ontario's SARS Scientific Advisory Committee, described public health officials’ preparedness and emergency response at the time of the outbreak as “very, very basic and minimal at best”.
Critics of the response often cite poorly outlined and enforced protocol for protecting healthcare workers and identifying infected patients as a major contributing factor to the continued spread of the virus.
The atmosphere of fear and uncertainty surrounding the outbreak resulted in staffing issues in area hospitals when healthcare workers elected to resign rather than risk exposure to SARS.
In late February 2003, Italian doctor Carlo Urbani was called into The French Hospital of Hanoi to look at Johnny Chen, an American businessman who had fallen ill with what doctors thought was a bad case of influenza.
Urbani realized that Chen's ailment was probably a new and highly contagious disease.
He immediately notified the WHO.
He also persuaded the Vietnamese Health Ministry to begin isolating patients and screening travelers, thus slowing the early pace of the epidemic.
He subsequently contracted the disease himself, and died in March 2003.
The CDC and Canada's National Microbiology Laboratory identified the SARS genome in April 2003.
Scientists at Erasmus University in Rotterdam, the Netherlands demonstrated that the SARS coronavirus fulfilled Koch's postulates thereby confirming it as the causative agent.
In the experiments, macaques infected with the virus developed the same symptoms as human SARS victims.In late May 2003, studies were conducted using samples of wild animals sold as food in the local market in Guangdong, China.
The results found that the SARS coronavirus could be isolated from masked palm civets (Paguma sp.), even if the animals did not show clinical signs of the virus.
The preliminary conclusion was the SARS virus crossed the xenographic barrier from asian palm civet to humans, and more than 10,000 masked palm civets were killed in Guangdong Province.
The virus was also later found in raccoon dogs (Nyctereuteus sp.), ferret badgers (Melogale spp.), and domestic cats.
In 2005, two studies identified a number of SARS-like coronaviruses in Chinese bats.Phylogenetic analysis of these viruses indicated a high probability that SARS coronavirus originated in bats and spread to humans either directly or through animals held in Chinese markets.
The bats did not show any visible signs of disease, but are the likely natural reservoirs of SARS-like coronaviruses.
In late 2006, scientists from the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention of Hong Kong University and the Guangzhou Centre for Disease Control and Prevention established a genetic link between the SARS coronavirus appearing in civets and humans, bearing out claims that the disease had jumped across species.In December 2017, "after years of searching across China, where the disease first emerged, researchers reported ... that they had found a remote cave in Yunnan province, which is home to horseshoe bats that carry a strain of a particular virus known as a coronavirus.
This strain has all the genetic building blocks of the type that triggered the global outbreak of SARS in 2002."
The research was performed by Shi Zheng-Li, Cui Jie and coworkers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, China, and published in PLOS Pathogens.
The authors are quoted as stating that "another deadly outbreak of SARS could emerge at any time.
As they point out, the cave where they discovered their strain is only a kilometre from the nearest village."
The World Health Organization declared severe acute respiratory syndrome contained on 5 July 2003.
In the following years, four SARS cases were reported in China between December 2003 and January 2004.
There were also three separate laboratory accidents that resulted in infection.
In one of these cases, an ill lab worker spread the virus to several other people.
Study of live SARS specimens requires a BSL-3 facility; some studies of inactivated SARS specimens can be done at BSL-2 facilities.
A small number of cats and dogs tested positive for the virus during the outbreak.
However these animals did not transmit the virus to other animals of the same species or to humans.
Fear of contracting the virus from consuming infected wild animals resulted in public bans and reduced business for meat markets in southern China and Hong Kong.
Timeline of the SARS outbreak – Worldwide outbreak of SARS between 2002 and 2004
2009 flu pandemic
Bird flu
Health crisis
List of medical professionals who died during the SARS outbreak
MERS-CoV – a coronavirus discovered in June 2012 in Saudi Arabia
Public health in the People's Republic of China
SARS conspiracy theory
SARS-CoV-2 – a coronavirus discovered in December 2019 in China and causing the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic
Zhong Nanshan
Sihoe, Alan D.L; Wong, Randolph H.L; Lee, Alex T.H; Lau, Lee Sung; Leung, Natalie Y.Y; Law, Kin Ip; Yim, Anthony P.C (2004).
"Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Complicated by Spontaneous Pneumothorax".
Chest.
125 (6): 2345–51.
doi:10.1378/chest.125.6.2345.
PMID 15189961.
Enserink, M (2013).
"War Stories".
Science.
339 (6125): 1264–8.
PMID 23493690.
Enserink, M (2013).
"SARS: Chronology of the Epidemic".
Science.
339 (6125): 1266–71.
Bibcode:2013Sci...339.1266E.
PMID 23493691.
Normile, D (2013).
"Understanding the Enemy".
Science.
339 (6125): 1269–73.
Bibcode:2013Sci...339.1269N.
PMID 23493692.
MedlinePlus: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome News, links and information from The United States National Library of Medicine.
[http://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/ Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Symptoms and treatment guidelines, travel advisory, and daily outbreak updates.
From the World Health Organization (WHO).
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Information on the international outbreak of the illness known as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).
Provided by the US Centers for Disease Control
2002–2004 SARS outbreak
The 2002–2004 SARS outbreak was an epidemic involving severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), which originated in Foshan, China in November 2002.
Over 8,000 people were infected, and at least 774 died worldwide.
On 16 November 2002, an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) began in China's Guangdong province, bordering Hong Kong.
A farmer in the Shunde district of Foshan County was likely the first case of infection.
The People's Republic of China notified the World Health Organization (WHO) about this outbreak on 10 February 2003, reporting 305 cases including 105 health-care workers and five deaths.
Later it reported that the outbreak in Guangdong had peaked in mid-February 2003.
However, this appears to have been false because subsequently 806 cases of infection and 34 deaths were reported.Early in the epidemic, the Chinese Government discouraged its press from reporting on SARS, delayed reporting to WHO, and initially did not provide information to Chinese outside Guangdong province, where the disease is believed to have originated.
Also, a WHO team that travelled to Beijing was not allowed to visit Guangdong province for several weeks.
This resulted in international criticism, which seems to have led to a change in Government policy in early April.
The first super-spreader, Zhou Zuofen, a fishmonger, checked-in to the Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital in Guangzhou on 31 January, where he infected 30 nurses and doctors.
The virus soon spread to nearby hospitals.
In February 2003, Hong Kong's SARS index-patient was Dr. Liu Jianlun, who had come to attend a family wedding gathering; Dr. Liu was on the staff at Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital in Guangdong and had treated SARS patients.On 21 February, Dr. Liu and his wife checked into room 911 on the 9th floor of the Metropole Hotel.
Despite feeling ill he visited with his family and they traveled around Hong Kong.
By the morning of 22 February, he knew he was very sick and walked to nearby Kwong Wah Hospital to seek treatment.
He warned staff that he was very sick and to put him in isolation.
He never recovered and died in the Intensive Care Unit on 4 March.
Dr. Liu is believed to have been a SARS super-spreader: twenty-three other Metropole guests developed SARS, including seven from the ninth floor.
Liu's brother-in-law, who sought treatment in late February, was hospitalized in Kwong Wah Hospital on 1 March and died on 19 March.
It is estimated that around 80% of the Hong Kong cases were due to Liu.
The virus was carried to Hanoi, Vietnam by Chinese-American Johnny Chen, a resident of Shanghai who had roomed across the hall from Liu at the Metropole.
He was admitted to the French Hospital of Hanoi on 26 February, where he infected at least 38 members of the staff.
Even though he was evacuated to Hong Kong, he died on 13 March.Dr. Carlo Urbani, a WHO infectious disease specialist, was among the staff who examined Chen.
Urbani observed that other hospital staff were already falling ill and realized that he was dealing with a new and dangerous disease.
He himself became infected and died on 29 March.
On 23 February, an elderly woman named Kwan Sui-Chu who had also been a Metropole Hotel guest, returned to Toronto from Hong Kong.
She died at home on 5 March, after infecting her son Tse Chi Kwai, who subsequently spread the disease to Scarborough Grace Hospital and died on 13 March.
On 25 February, a businessman who had traveled to Hong Kong and Guangdong Province returned home to Taipei, marking the beginning of the outbreak on Taiwan.
Almost all of those infected were either medical staff or family members of persons who had fallen ill.
It is believed that the affected medical staff were unaware of the risks and were not using respiratory precautions such as masks, a safety protocol intended to protect medical workers from highly contagious diseases.
On 1 March 26-year-old Esther Mok, another Metropole guest, was admitted to Tan Tock Seng Hospital after visiting Hong Kong, starting the outbreak in Singapore.
Although she recovered, various family members did not.
On 4 March, a 27-year-old man, who had visited a guest on the Metropole's 9th floor 11 days earlier, was admitted to Hong Kong's Prince of Wales Hospital.
At least 99 hospital workers (including 17 medical students) were infected while treating him.
On 11 March, Dr. Carlo Urbani travelled to Bangkok, Thailand to attend a medical conference.
He fell ill during the flight and told a friend waiting at Bangkok not to touch him, to call an ambulance and take him to a hospital.
He was isolated in an Intensive Care Unit.
A similar outbreak of a mysterious respiratory infection was reported among Hong Kong healthcare workers.
On 12 March, WHO issued a global alert about a new infectious disease of unknown origin in both Vietnam and Hong Kong.
On 15 March, WHO issued a heightened global health alert about a mysterious pneumonia with a case definition of SARS after cases in Singapore and Canada were also identified.
The alert included a rare emergency travel advisory to international travelers, healthcare professionals, and health authorities.
The Center for Disease Control (CDC) issued a travel advisory stating that persons considering travel to the affected areas in Asia (Hong Kong, Singapore, Vietnam, and China) should not go.
On 17 March, an international network of 11 laboratories was established to determine the cause of SARS and develop potential treatments.
The CDC held its first briefing on SARS and said that 14 suspected SARS cases were being investigated in the US.
On 20 March, WHO reported that several hospitals in Vietnam and Hong Kong were operating with half the usual staff because many workers stayed home out of fear of getting infected.
WHO raised the concern that substandard care of the infected patients might contribute to the spread of the disease.
On 25 March, Hong Kong authorities stated that nine tourists had contracted the disease from a mainland Chinese man who had boarded the same plane on 15 March, Air China Flight 112 to Beijing.
SARS started to hit Amoy Gardens Block E heavily.
The Singapore Government started to enforce compulsory quarantine of any infected person.
On 27 March, Arthur K.
C. Li, head of the Hong Kong Education and Manpower Bureau, announced cancellation of all classes in educational institutions.
The Ministry of Education of Singapore announced that all primary schools, secondary schools, and junior colleges were to be shut until 6 April 2003.
Polytechnics and universities were not affected.On 29 March, Dr. Urbani died in Bangkok of a massive heart attack.
On 30 March, Hong Kong authorities quarantined estate E of the Amoy Gardens housing estate due to a massive (200+ cases) outbreak in the building.
The balcony was completely closed and guarded by the police.
The residents of the building were later transferred to the quarantined Lei Yue Mun Holiday Camp and Lady MacLehose Holiday Village on 1 April because the building was deemed a health hazard.
Most of the cases were linked to apartments with a north-western orientation which shared the same sewage pipe.
According to government officials, the virus was brought into the estate by an infected kidney patient (the type of kidney illness was not specified) after discharge from Prince of Wales Hospital, who visited his elder brother living on the seventh floor.
Through excretion, the virus spread through drainage.
One theory speculated that the virus was spread by airborne transmission, through dried up U-shaped P-traps in the drainage system which a maritime breeze blew into the estate's balconies and stairwell ventilation.
It was confirmed that the virus spread via droplets, but this later outbreak made officials question the possibility that the virus could be spread through the air.
On 1 April, the U.S. government called back non-essential personnel in their consulate office in Hong Kong and Guangzhou.
The US government also advised US citizens not to travel to the region.
On 2 April, Chinese medical officials began reporting the status of the SARS outbreak.
China's southern Guangdong province reported 361 new infections and 9 new deaths, increasing the total Mainland China figures previously reported at end-February.
The virus was also detected in Beijing and Shanghai.
The WHO also advised travellers to avoid Hong Kong and Guangdong during a press briefing.On 3 April, a WHO team of international scientists landed in Guangzhou from Beijing to discuss with officials, but the team was yet to inspect any suspected origin or any medical facilities on the progress of infection control.
Fifteen of the quarantined Amoy Gardens residents at Lei Yue Mun Holiday Camp were relocated to the Sai Kung Outdoor Recreation Centre after an overnight protest on washroom sharing.
The first medical worker infected with SARS died in Hong Kong.
The doctor's daughter and infected wife survived his illness, even though the wife was also among the quarantined medical workers under intensive care.
Hong Kong school closures were extended by two weeks to 21 April.
On 4 April, the WHO team inspected the first infection case in Foshan County.
The male infected four people.
But, he did not infect his family.
A 40-year-old woman became the first local case in Shanghai.
A Chinese health specialist admitted at a press conference of not informing the public early enough about the outbreak.
The PRC Health Minister also claimed that the disease has been under control in most parts of mainland China.
He also released the names of seven drugs which he claimed to be effective in curing SARS.
WHO officials said that the information provided by the PRC about the disease has been "very detailed".
US government enforced compulsory quarantine of an infected person.
On 5 April, the Singapore government announced that school closures would be extended.
Junior colleges were to reopen on 9 April, secondary schools would reopen on 14 April and primary schools and pre-schools would reopen on 16 April.On 6 April, a SARS case was found in Manila, a person who had returned from Hong Kong.
On 8 April, SARS started to plague the Lower Ngau Tau Kok Estate near Amoy Gardens in Kowloon.
Hong Kong health officials warned that SARS had spread so far domestically and abroad that it was here to stay.
Nevertheless, WHO officials remained cautiously optimistic that the disease could still be contained.On 9 April, James Earl Salisbury died of SARS at a hospital in Hong Kong.
An American Mormon and a teacher at Shenzhen Polytechnic, he had been sick for approximately one month before his death, but he was originally diagnosed with pneumonia.
His son Michael "Mickey" Salisbury was with him in China and also contracted the disease, but he survived it.
Salisbury's death led to more open admissions by the Chinese government about the spread of SARS.On 10 April, Jim Hughes, the head of infectious disease at the CDC, confirming the warnings of Hong Kong health officials, claimed that he believed that SARS could no longer be eradicated in the Far East.
However, he remained hopeful that it could be prevented from spreading widely in North America.On 11 April, the World Health Organization issued a global health alert for SARS as it became clear the disease was being spread by global air travel.
On 12 April, Marco Marra, director of the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, which is part of the British Columbia Cancer Agency, announced that scientists at his centre had broken the genetic code of the virus suspected of causing the disease.
In Toronto, three more people died of SARS, bringing the Canadian death toll to 13.
On 16 April, the WHO issued a press release stating that the coronavirus identified by a number of laboratories was the official cause of SARS.
The virus was officially named the SARS virus.On 17 April, first confirmed case of SARS from India was reported.On 19 April, Premier of the People's Republic of China Wen Jiabao announced that there would be severe consequences for local officials who do not report SARS cases in a timely and accurate manner, signaling a major change in policy.
(SARS had also been gaining prominence in the mainland Chinese media; by late April, it had jumped from virtual invisibility onto the front-page, with daily reports from all provinces on new cases and measures.)
On 20 April, Beijing's mayor Meng Xuenong and the health minister of the PRC Zhang Wenkang were replaced respectively by Wang Qishan from Hainan and the former deputy health minister Gao Qiang.
They were the first two high-rank officials in the PRC to be dismissed because of the fallout of the epidemic.
In the news conference chaired by Gao Qiang several hours earlier, the PRC admitted that in Beijing there were more than 300 cases, as opposed to the previous figure of only 37.
One day later the figure had increased to 407.
Chinese officials also admitted to major underreporting of cases, which were attributed to bureaucratic ineptitude.
On 22 April, school in Hong Kong started to reopen in stages.
On 23 April, Beijing announced that all primary and secondary schools would be closed for two weeks.
A few days before, some colleges in Peking University had been closed because some students had been infected.
The WHO issued travel advisories against Beijing, Toronto, and Shanxi Province.On 25 April, Taipei city government closed Taipei Municipal Hospital Hoping branch, and quarantined its 930 staff and 240 patients for 2 weeks.
Later, people were relocated and the building sanitized.
On 24 April, the Hong Kong Government announced an HK$11.8 billion relief package designed to assist Hong Kong's battered tourism, entertainment, retail, and catering sectors, consisting of a waiver of tourism- and transport-related license fees, and HK$1 billion allocated for tourism promotion overseas.
The package also includes a salaries tax rebate and reduced rates.
On 26 April, Wu Yi was named Zhang Wenkang's replacement as PRC health minister.
On 26–27 April, Chinese authorities closed down theatres, discos, and other entertainment venues in Beijing as the death toll in Beijing continued to rise, threatening to become the worst-hit area of the country, eclipsing the Guangdong province.
Authorities were bolstered by the fact that the infection rate seemed to have declined, with the Guangdong region only exporting three new infections over the weekend.
The economic impact was becoming dramatic as shops, restaurants, markets, bars, universities, schools, and many other businesses had closed, while some government ministries and large state banks were working with minimal staff levels.
On 28 April, WHO declared the outbreak in Vietnam to be over as no new cases were reported for 20 days.
On 29 April, leaders of member countries of ASEAN and the PRC premier held an emergency summit in Bangkok, Thailand in order to address the SARS problem.
Among the decisions made were the setting-up of a ministerial-level task force and uniform pre-departure health screening in airports.
On 30 April, the World Health Organization lifted the SARS travel warning for Toronto.
The decision was made because "it is satisfied with local measures to stop the spread of SARS".
Canadian officials said they would step up screenings at airports.
On 3 May, the 2003 FIFA Women's World Cup was abruptly moved to the United States due to the outbreak.
China maintained its automatic qualification and later hosted the Women's World Cup 4 years later.
On 4 May, the newly infected number of people in Hong Kong dropped to a single digit.
On 19 May, the WHO Annual Meeting was held in Geneva.
Hong Kong pushed for the Tourism Warning to be lifted.
On 20 May, the WHO refused to lift the Tourism Warning for Hong Kong and Guangdong.
On 23 May, after a recount of the number of SARS patients, the WHO lifted the Tourism Warning for Hong Kong and Guangdong.
On 24 May, the number of newly infected patients reached zero for in Hong Kong, the first time since the outbreak in the territory in March.
On 24 May, a new cluster of about 20 suspected patients was reported in Toronto.
By 29 May, more than 7,000 people were instructed to quarantine themselves in Canada by authorities seeking to control the potential spread of the SARS outbreak.On 31 May, Singapore was removed from WHO's list of 'Infected Areas'.
On 23 June, Hong Kong was removed from WHO's list of 'Affected Areas', while Toronto, Beijing, and Taiwan remained.
On 27 June, the World Health Organization stated that the world population should be SARS-free within the next two to three weeks, but warned the disease could emerge in China next winter.
On 5 July, WHO declared the SARS outbreak contained and removed Taiwan from the list of affected areas.
There had been no new cases for 20 days although around 200 people were still hospitalized with the disease.
On 8 Sep, Singapore announced that a post-doctoral worker in a SARS research lab in the National University of Singapore had contracted the disease while working on the West Nile virus but recovered shortly thereafter.
It was suspected that the two viruses mixed while he was doing his research.
The Hong Kong Harbour Fest was organized and held from 17 October to 11 November 2003 as part of an HK$1 billion program to revive the economy of Hong Kong after the SARS.
It was a government underwritten event organized by InvestHK, under the auspices of the Economic Relaunch Working Group, in collaboration with the American Chamber of Commerce.
On 10 Dec, a researcher in a SARS lab in Taiwan was found infected with SARS after returning from Singapore attending a medical conference, 74 people in Singapore were quarantined but none of them were infected.
On 27 Dec, China announced the first suspected case of SARS in six months in Guangdong in an individual who was not a SARS researcher.
2 January: Shenzhen's bid for the 2009 Summer Universiade was cancelled, and announced a bid for the 2011 Summer Universiade by FISU.
5 January: China confirmed that the case reported in December was a case of wild source SARS.
The Philippines announced a possible case in a person just returned from Hong Kong.
7 January: The Philippines announced that their possible SARS case was just pneumonia.
In China, Asian palm civets were culled in markets (the civets were thought to be a reservoir for the disease).
10 January: A restaurant worker in Guangdong was confirmed as the second wild source SARS since the outbreak was contained.
Guangzhou was also the site of the first case in December and was thought to be the origin of the virus in the original outbreak.
Three Hong Kong television reporters who visited SARS-related sites in Guangzhou were declared free of the disease.
17 January: China announced a third case of SARS in Guangzhou.
WHO officials urged more testing to bring the three recently announced cases into line with their standards; however they also announced SARS virus had been detected by a WHO team in civet cages at the restaurant where the second case worked and in civet cages in the market.
31 January: China announced the fourth case of SARS as a 40-year-old doctor from the southern city of Guangzhou, and gave his family name as Liu.
He was discharged when the announcement was made.
SARS broke out again in Beijing and in Anhui Province.
On 22 April, China announced that a 53-year-old woman had died on 19 April, its first SARS death since June.
One person died and nine were infected in the outbreak which was first reported on 22 April.
The first 2 infected cases involved a postgraduate student and a researcher at the National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention (abbrev.: Institute of Virology) of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention; an additional 7 cases were diagnosed, which were linked with close personal contact with the student, the lab or with a nurse who treated the student..
1 May: Two additional confirmed cases of SARS and three additional suspected cases were reported in Beijing, all related to a single research lab, the Diarrhea Virus Laboratory in the CDC's National Institute of Virology in Beijing.
"The cases had been linked to experiments using live and inactive SARS coronavirus in the CDC's virology and diarrhea institutes where interdisciplinary research on the SARS virus was conducted."
The total number of cases was six, with four in Beijing and two in Anhui Province.
2 May: China announced the three suspected cases as genuine cases of SARS, bringing the total cases in a recent outbreak to nine.
189 people were released from quarantine.
18 May: As no new infections had been reported in a three-week period, WHO announced China as free of further cases of SARS, but "biosafety concerns remain".
In May 2005, Jim Yardley of the New York Times wrote: "Not a single case of the severe acute respiratory syndrome has been reported this year [2005] or in late 2004.
It is the first winter without a case since the initial outbreak in late 2002.
In addition, the epidemic strain of SARS that caused at least 774 deaths worldwide by June 2003 has not been seen outside of a laboratory since then."
List of medical professionals who died during the SARS outbreak
Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus
Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), or EMC/2012 (HCoV-EMC/2012), is a species of coronavirus which infects humans, bats, and camels.
The infecting virus is an enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus which enters its host cell by binding to the DPP4 receptor.
The species is a member of the genus Betacoronavirus and subgenus Merbecovirus.Initially called 2012 novel coronavirus (2012-nCoV) or simply novel coronavirus (nCoV), it was first reported in 2012 after genome sequencing of a virus isolated from sputum samples from a person who fell ill in a 2012 outbreak of a new flu.
As of July 2015, MERS-CoV cases have been reported in over 21 countries, including Saudi Arabia,  Jordan, Qatar, Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Turkey, Oman, Algeria, Bangladesh, Indonesia (none were confirmed), Austria, the United Kingdom, South Korea, the United States,  Mainland China, Thailand, and  the Philippines.
MERS-CoV is one of several viruses identified by WHO as a likely cause of a future epidemic.
They list it for urgent research and development.
The virus MERS-CoV is a new member of the beta group of coronavirus, Betacoronavirus, lineage C.
MERS-CoV genomes are phylogenetically classified into two clades, clade A and B.
The earliest cases of MERS were of clade A clusters (EMC/2012 and Jordan-N3/2012), and new cases are genetically distinct (clade B).MERS-CoV is distinct from SARS coronavirus and distinct from the common-cold coronavirus and known endemic human betacoronaviruses HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1.
Until 23 May 2013, MERS-CoV had frequently been referred to as a SARS-like virus, or simply the novel coronavirus, and earlier it was referred to colloquially on messageboards as the "Saudi SARS".
Over 2,000 cases of MERS have been reported by 2017 with about 600 deaths, so the case fatality rate is <30%.
182 genomes have been sequenced by 2015 (94 from humans and 88 from dromedary camels).
All sequences are >99% similar.
The genomes can be divided into two clades - A and B - with the majority of cases being caused by clade B.
Human and camel strains are intermixed suggesting multiple transmission events.
The first confirmed case was reported in Saudi Arabia in 2012.
Egyptian virologist Dr. Ali Mohamed Zaki isolated and identified a previously unknown coronavirus from the man's lungs.
Dr. Zaki then posted his findings on 24 September 2012 on ProMED-mail.
The isolated cells showed cytopathic effects (CPE),  in the form of rounding and syncytia formation.A second case was found in September 2012, a 49-year-old male living in Qatar presented with similar flu symptoms, and a sequence of the virus was nearly identical to that of the first case.
In November 2012, similar cases appeared in Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Additional cases were noted, with deaths associated, and rapid research and monitoring of this novel coronavirus began.
It is not certain whether the infections are the result of a single zoonotic event with subsequent human-to-human transmission, or if the multiple geographic sites of infection represent multiple zoonotic events from an unknown common source.
A study by Ziad Memish of Riyadh University and colleagues suggests that the virus arose sometime between July 2007 and June 2012, with perhaps as many as 7 separate zoonotic transmissions.
Among animal reservoirs, CoV has a large genetic diversity yet the samples from patients suggest a similar genome, and therefore common source, though the data are limited.
It has been determined through molecular clock analysis, that viruses from the EMC/2012 and England/Qatar/2012 date to early 2011 suggesting that these cases are descended from a single zoonotic event.
It would appear the MERS-CoV has been circulating in the human population for greater than one year without detection and suggests independent transmission from an unknown source.
In humans, the virus has a strong tropism for nonciliated bronchial epithelial cells, and it has been shown to effectively evade the innate immune responses and antagonize interferon (IFN) production in these cells.
This tropism is unique in that most respiratory viruses target ciliated cells.Due to the clinical similarity between MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, it was proposed that they may use the same cellular receptor; the exopeptidase, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
However, it was later discovered that neutralization of ACE2 by recombinant antibodies does not prevent MERS-CoV infection.
Further research identified dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4; also known as CD26) as a functional cellular receptor for MERS-CoV.
Unlike other known coronavirus receptors, the enzymatic activity of DPP4 is not required for infection.
As would be expected, the amino acid sequence of DPP4 is highly conserved across species and is expressed in the human bronchial epithelium and kidneys.
Bat DPP4 genes appear to have been subject to a high degree of adaptive evolution as a response to coronavirus infections, so the lineage leading to MERS-CoV may have circulated in bat populations for a long period of time before being transmitted to people.
On 13 February 2013, the World Health Organization stated "the risk of sustained person-to-person transmission appears to be very low."
The cells MERS-CoV infects in the lungs only account for 20% of respiratory epithelial cells, so a large number of virions are likely needed to be inhaled to cause infection.Dr. Anthony S. Fauci of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, stated that as of now MERS-CoV "does not spread in a sustained person to person way at all."
Dr. Fauci stated that there is potential danger in that it is possible for the virus to mutate into a strain that does transmit from person to person.However, the infection of healthcare workers (HCW) has led to concerns of human to human transmission.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) list MERS as transmissible from human-to-human.
From their FAQ, in answer to the question "Does MERS-CoV spread from person to person?", they answer "MERS-CoV has been shown to spread between people who are in close contact.
Transmission from infected patients to healthcare personnel has also been observed.
Clusters of cases in several countries are being investigated."
There is also a New York Times article which provides some correlative context for this.However, on the 28th of May, the CDC revealed that the Illinois man who was originally thought to have been the first incidence of person to person spread (from the Indiana man at a business meeting), had in fact tested negative for MERS-CoV.
After completing additional and more definitive tests using a neutralising antibody assay, experts at the CDC have concluded that the Indiana patient did not spread the virus to the Illinois patient.
Tests concluded that the Illinois man had not been previously infected.
It is possible for silent MERS to occur, this is when the patient does not develop symptoms.
Early research has shown that up to 20% of cases show no signs of active infection but have MERS-CoV antibodies in their blood.
The virus appears to have originated in bats.
The virus itself has been isolated from a bat.
This virus is closely related to the Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 and Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5.
Serological evidence shows that these viruses have infected camels for at least 20 years.
The most recent common ancestor of several human strains has been dated to March 2012 (95% confidence interval December 2011 to June 2012).The evidence available to date suggests that the viruses have been present in bats for some time and had spread to camels by the mid 1990s.
The viruses appear to have spread from camels to humans in the early 2010s.
The original bat host species and the time of initial infection in this species has yet to be determined.
Examination of the sequences of 238 isolates suggested that this virus has evolved into three clades differing in codon usage, host, and geographic distribution.
Early research suggested the virus is related to one found in the Egyptian tomb bat.
In September 2012 Ron Fouchier speculated that the virus might have originated in bats.
Work by epidemiologist Ian Lipkin of Columbia University in New York showed that the virus isolated from a bat looked to be a match to the virus found in humans.
2c betacoronaviruses were detected in Nycteris bats in Ghana and Pipistrellus bats in Europe that are phylogenetically related to the MERS-CoV virus.
However the major natural reservoir where humans get the virus infection remained unknown until on 9 August 2013, a report in the journal The Lancet Infectious Diseases showed that 50 out of 50 (100%) blood serum from Omani camels and 15 of 105 (14%) from Spanish camels had protein-specific antibodies against the MERS-CoV spike protein.
Blood serum from European sheep, goats, cattle, and other camelids had no such antibodies.Soon after on 5 September 2013 a seroepidemiological study published in the journal of Eurosurveillance by R.A Perera et al. where they investigated 1343 human and 625 animal sera indicated, the abundant presence of MERS-CoV specific antibody in 108 out of 110 Egyptian dromedary camels but not in other animals such as goats, cows or sheep in this region.
These are the first and significant scientific reports that indicated the role of "dromedary camels" as a reservoir of MERS-CoV.
Recent work links camels to the virus.
An ahead-of-print dispatch for the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases records research showing the coronavirus infection in dromedary camel calves and adults, 99.9% matching to the genomes of human clade B MERS-CoV.At least one person who has fallen sick with MERS was known to have come into contact with camels or recently drank camel milk.Countries like Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates produce and consume large amounts of camel meat.
The possibility exists that African or Australian bats harbor the virus and transmit it to camels.
Imported camels from these regions might have carried the virus to the Middle East.In 2013 MERS-CoV was identified in three members of a dromedary camel herd held in a Qatar barn, which was linked to two confirmed human cases who have since recovered.
The presence of MERS-CoV in the camels was confirmed by the National Institute of Public Health and Environment (RIVM) of the Ministry of Health and the Erasmus Medical Center (WHO Collaborating Center), the Netherlands.
None of the camels showed any sign of disease when the samples were collected.
The Qatar Supreme Council of Health advised in November 2013 that people with underlying health conditions, such as heart disease, diabetes, kidney disease, respiratory disease, the immunosuppressed, and the elderly, avoid any close animal contacts when visiting farms and markets, and to practice good hygiene, such as washing hands.A further study on dromedary camels from Saudi Arabia published in December 2013 revealed the presence of MERS-CoV in 90% of the evaluated dromedary camels (310), suggesting that dromedary camels not only could be the main reservoir of MERS-CoV, but also the animal source of MERS.According to the 27 March 2014 MERS-CoV summary update, recent studies support that camels serve as the primary source of the MERS-CoV infecting humans, while bats may be the ultimate reservoir of the virus.
Evidence includes the frequency with which the virus has been found in camels to which human cases have been exposed, seriological data which shows widespread transmission in camels, and the similarity of the camel CoV to the human CoV.On 6 June 2014, the Arab News newspaper highlighted the latest research findings in the New England Journal of Medicine in which a 44-year-old Saudi man who kept a herd of nine camels died of MERS in November 2013.
His friends said they witnessed him applying a topical medicine to the nose of one of his ill camels—four of them reportedly sick with nasal discharge—seven days before he himself became stricken with MERS.
Researchers sequenced the virus found in one of the sick camels and the virus that killed the man, and found that their genomes were identical.
In that same article, the Arab News reported that as of 6 June 2014, there have been 689 cases of MERS reported within the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with 283 deaths.
MERS-CoV is more closely related to the bat coronaviruses HKU4 and HKU5 (lineage 2C) than it is to SARS-CoV (lineage 2B) (2, 9), sharing more than 90% sequence identity with their closest relationships, bat coronaviruses HKU4 and HKU5 and therefore considered to belong to the same species by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV).
Mnemonic:
Taxon identifier:
Scientific name: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Common name: MERS-CoV
Synonym: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Other names:
London1 novel CoV/2012
Human Coronavirus Erasmus Medical Center/2012 (HCoV-EMC/2012)
Rank:
› Group: IV; positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses
› Genus: Betacoronavirus› Species: Betacoronavirus 1 (commonly called Human coronavirus OC43), Human coronavirus HKU1, Murine coronavirus, Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5, Rousettus bat coronavirus HKU9, Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4, MERS-CoVVirus hosts:
Camels
BatsStrains:
Isolate:
Isolate:
NCBI
The virus grows readily on Vero cells and LLC-MK2 cells.The receptor for this virus is CD26 (dipeptidyl peptidase 4).
Saudi officials had not given permission for Dr. Zaki, the first isolator of the human strain, to send a sample of the virus to Fouchier and were angered when Fouchier claimed the patent on the full genetic sequence of the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus.The editor of The Economist observed, "Concern over security must not slow urgent work.
Studying a deadly virus is risky.
Not studying it is riskier."
Dr. Zaki was fired from his job at the hospital as a result of bypassing the Saudi Ministry of Health in his announcement and sharing his sample and findings.At their annual meeting of the World Health Assembly in May 2013, WHO chief Margaret Chan declared that intellectual property, or patents on strains of new virus, should not impede nations from protecting their citizens by limiting scientific investigations.
Deputy Health Minister Ziad Memish raised concerns that scientists who held the patent for the MERS-CoV virus would not allow other scientists to use patented material and were therefore delaying the development of diagnostic tests.
Erasmus MC responded that the patent application did not restrict public health research into MERS coronavirus, and that the virus and diagnostic tests were shipped—free of charge—to all that requested such reagents.
There are a number of mapping efforts focused on tracking MERS coronavirus.
On 2 May 2014, the Corona Map was launched to track the MERS coronavirus in realtime on the world map.
The data is officially reported by WHO or the Ministry of Health of the respective country.
HealthMap also tracks case reports with inclusion of news and social media as data sources as part of HealthMap MERS.
Lastly, South Korea was infected in mid-2015, with 38 deaths among 186 cases of infection.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Outbreak
Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4
Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations
Emergence of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
MERS-CoV Complete Genome
Molecular Illustration of MERS-Coronavirus
Philippines still MERS-CoV free – DOH
Deadly Middle East Coronavirus found in an Egyptian tomb bat
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a type of respiratory failure characterized by rapid onset of widespread inflammation in the lungs.
Symptoms include shortness of breath, rapid breathing, and bluish skin coloration.
Among those who survive, a decreased quality of life is relatively common.Causes may include sepsis, pancreatitis, trauma, pneumonia, and aspiration.
The underlying mechanism involves diffuse injury to cells which form the barrier of the microscopic air sacs of the lungs, surfactant dysfunction, activation of the immune system, and dysfunction of the body's regulation of blood clotting.
In effect, ARDS impairs the lungs' ability to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Diagnosis is based on a PaO2/FiO2 ratio (ratio of partial pressure arterial oxygen and fraction of inspired oxygen) of less than 300 mm Hg despite a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of more than 5 cm H2O.
Heart related pulmonary edema, as the cause, must be excluded.The primary treatment involves mechanical ventilation together with treatments directed at the underlying cause.
Ventilation strategies include using low volumes and low pressures.
If oxygenation remains insufficient, lung recruitment maneuvers and neuromuscular blockers may be used.
If this is insufficient, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be an option.
The syndrome is associated with a death rate between 35 and 50 %.Globally, ARDS affects more than 3 million people a year.
The condition was first described in 1967.
Although the terminology of "adult respiratory distress syndrome" has at times been used to differentiate ARDS from "infant respiratory distress syndrome" in newborns, the international consensus is that "acute respiratory distress syndrome" is the best term because ARDS can affect people of all ages.
There are modified diagnostic criteria for children and areas of the world with less resources.
The signs and symptoms of ARDS often begin within two hours of an inciting event, but can occur after 1–3 days.
Signs and symptoms may include shortness of breath, fast breathing, and a low oxygen level in the blood due to abnormal ventilation.
Other common symptoms include muscle fatigue and general weakness, low blood pressure, a dry, hacking cough, and fever.
Complications may include the following:
Lungs: barotrauma (volutrauma), pulmonary embolism (PE), pulmonary fibrosis, ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP)
Kidney: acute kidney failure, positive fluid balance
Mechanical: vascular injury, pneumothorax (by placing pulmonary artery catheter), tracheal injury/stenosis (result of intubation and/or irritation by endotracheal tube)
Nutritional: malnutrition (catabolic state), electrolyte abnormalitiesOther complications that are typically associated with ARDS include:
Atelectasis: small air pockets within the lung collapse
Complications that arise from treatment in a hospital: blood clots formed by lying down for long periods of time, weakness in muscles that are used for breathing, stress ulcers, and even depression or other mental illnesses.
Failure of multiple organs
Pulmonary hypertension or increase in blood pressure in the main artery from the heart to the lungs.
This complication typically occurs due to the restriction of the blood vessel due to inflammation of the mechanical ventilation
Diffuse compromise of the pulmonary system resulting in ARDS generally occurs in the setting of critical illness.
ARDS may be seen in the setting of severe pulmonary (pneumonia) or systemic infection (sepsis), following trauma, multiple blood transfusions (TRALI), severe burns, severe inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), near-drowning or other aspiration events, drug reactions, or inhalation injuries.
Some cases of ARDS are linked to large volumes of fluid used during post-trauma resuscitation.
ARDS is a form of fluid accumulation in the lungs not explained by heart failure (noncardiogenic pulmonary edema).
It is typically provoked by an acute injury to the lungs that results in flooding of the lungs' microscopic air sacs responsible for the exchange of gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide with capillaries in the lungs.
Additional common findings in ARDS include partial collapse of the lungs (atelectasis) and low levels of oxygen in the blood (hypoxemia).
The clinical syndrome is associated with pathological findings including pneumonia, eosinophilic pneumonia, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, acute fibrinous organizing pneumonia, and diffuse alveolar damage (DAD).
Of these, the pathology most commonly associated with ARDS is DAD, which is characterized by a diffuse inflammation of lung tissue.
The triggering insult to the tissue usually results in an initial release of chemical signals and other inflammatory mediators secreted by local epithelial and endothelial cells.
Neutrophils and some T-lymphocytes quickly migrate into the inflamed lung tissue and contribute in the amplification of the phenomenon.
Typical histological presentation involves diffuse alveolar damage and hyaline membrane formation in alveolar walls.
Although the triggering mechanisms are not completely understood, recent research has examined the role of inflammation and mechanical stress.
Diagnostic criteria for ARDS have changed over time as understanding of the pathophysiology has evolved.
The international consensus criteria for ARDS were most recently updated in 2012 and are known as the "Berlin definition".
In addition to generally broadening the diagnostic thresholds, other notable changes from the prior 1994 consensus criteria include discouraging the term "acute lung injury," and defining grades of ARDS severity according to degree of decrease in the oxygen content of the blood.
According to the 2012 Berlin definition, ARDS is characterized by the following:
lung injury of acute onset, within 1 week of an apparent clinical insult and with progression of respiratory symptoms
bilateral opacities on chest imaging (chest radiograph or CT) not explained by other lung pathology (e.g. effusion, lobar/lung collapse, or nodules)
respiratory failure not explained by heart failure or volume overload
decreased PaO2/FiO2 ratio (a decreased PaO2/FiO2 ratio indicates reduced arterial oxygenation from the available inhaled gas):
Note that the Berlin definition requires a minimum positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH2O for consideration of the PaO2/FiO2 ratio.
This degree of PEEP may be delivered noninvasively with CPAP to diagnose mild ARDS.Note that the 2012 "Berlin criteria" are a modification of the prior 1994 consensus conference definitions (see history).
Radiologic imaging has long been a criterion for diagnosis of ARDS.
Original definitions of ARDS specified that correlative chest X-ray findings were required for diagnosis, the diagnostic criteria have been expanded over time to accept CT and ultrasound findings as equally contributory.
Generally, radiographic findings of fluid accumulation (pulmonary edema) affecting both lungs and unrelated to increased cardiopulmonary vascular pressure (such as in heart failure) may be suggestive of ARDS.
Ultrasound findings suggestive of ARDS include the following:
Absence or reduction of lung sliding
"Spared areas" of normal parenchyma
Pleural line abnormalities (irregular thickened fragmented pleural line)
Nonhomogeneous distribution of B-lines (a characteristic ultrasound finding suggestive of fluid accumulation in the lungs)
Acute respiratory distress syndrome is usually treated with mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit (ICU).
Mechanical ventilation is usually delivered through a rigid tube which enters the oral cavity and is secured in the airway (endotracheal intubation), or by tracheostomy when prolonged ventilation (≥2 weeks) is necessary.
The role of non-invasive ventilation is limited to the very early period of the disease or to prevent worsening respiratory distress in individuals with atypical pneumonias, lung bruising, or major surgery patients, who are at risk of developing ARDS.
Treatment of the underlying cause is crucial.
Appropriate antibiotic therapy is started as soon as culture results are available, or if infection is suspected (whichever is earlier).
Empirical therapy may be appropriate if local microbiological surveillance is efficient.
Where possible the origin of the infection is removed.
When sepsis is diagnosed, appropriate local protocols are followed.
The overall goal of mechanical ventilation is to maintain acceptable gas exchange to meet the body's metabolic demands and to minimize adverse effects in its application.
The parameters PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure, to keep alveoli open), mean airway pressure (to promote recruitment (opening) of easily collapsible alveoli and predictor of hemodynamic effects) and plateau pressure (best predictor of alveolar overdistention) are used.Previously, mechanical ventilation aimed to achieve tidal volumes (Vt) of 12–15 ml/kg (where the weight is ideal body weight rather than actual weight).
Recent studies have shown that high tidal volumes can overstretch alveoli resulting in volutrauma (secondary lung injury).
The ARDS Clinical Network, or ARDSNet, completed a clinical trial that showed improved mortality when people with ARDS were ventilated with a tidal volume of 6 ml/kg compared to the traditional 12 ml/kg.
Low tidal volumes (Vt) may cause a permitted rise in blood carbon dioxide levels and collapse of alveoli because of their inherent tendency to increase shunting within the lung.
Physiologic dead space cannot change as it is ventilation without perfusion.
A shunt is perfusion without ventilation.
Low tidal volume ventilation was the primary independent variable associated with reduced mortality in the NIH-sponsored ARDSnet trial of tidal volume in ARDS.
Plateau pressure less than 30 cm H2O was a secondary goal, and subsequent analyses of the data from the ARDSnet trial and other experimental data demonstrate that there appears to be no safe upper limit to plateau pressure; regardless of plateau pressure, individuals with ARDS fare better with low tidal volumes.
No particular ventilator mode is known to improve mortality in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).Some practitioners favor airway pressure release ventilation when treating ARDS.
Well documented advantages to APRV ventilation include decreased airway pressures, decreased minute ventilation, decreased dead-space ventilation, promotion of spontaneous breathing, almost 24-hour-a-day alveolar recruitment, decreased use of sedation, near elimination of neuromuscular blockade, optimized arterial blood gas results, mechanical restoration of FRC (functional residual capacity), a positive effect on cardiac output (due to the negative inflection from the elevated baseline with each spontaneous breath), increased organ and tissue perfusion and potential for increased urine output secondary to increased kidney perfusion.
A patient with ARDS, on average, spends between 8 and 11 days on a mechanical ventilator; APRV may reduce this time significantly and conserve valuable resources.
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is used in mechanically ventilated people with ARDS to improve oxygenation.
In ARDS, three populations of alveoli can be distinguished.
There are normal alveoli which are always inflated and engaging in gas exchange, flooded alveoli which can never, under any ventilatory regime, be used for gas exchange, and atelectatic or partially flooded alveoli that can be "recruited" to participate in gas exchange under certain ventilatory regimens.
The recruitable alveoli represent a continuous population, some of which can be recruited with minimal PEEP, and others which can only be recruited with high levels of PEEP.
An additional complication is that some alveoli can only be opened with higher airway pressures than are needed to keep them open, hence the justification for maneuvers where PEEP is increased to very high levels for seconds to minutes before dropping the PEEP to a lower level.
PEEP can be harmful; high PEEP necessarily increases mean airway pressure and alveolar pressure, which can damage normal alveoli by overdistension resulting in DAD.
A compromise between the beneficial and adverse effects of PEEP is inevitable.
The 'best PEEP' used to be defined as 'some' cmH2O above the lower inflection point (LIP) in the sigmoidal pressure-volume relationship curve of the lung.
Recent research has shown that the LIP-point pressure is no better than any pressure above it, as recruitment of collapsed alveoli—and, more importantly, the overdistension of aerated units—occur throughout the whole inflation.
Despite the awkwardness of most procedures used to trace the pressure-volume curve, it is still used by some to define the minimum PEEP to be applied to their patients.
Some new ventilators can automatically plot a pressure-volume curve.
PEEP may also be set empirically.
Some authors suggest performing a 'recruiting maneuver'—a short time at a very high continuous positive airway pressure, such as 50 cmH2O (4.9 kPa)—to recruit or open collapsed units with a high distending pressure before restoring previous ventilation.
The final PEEP level should be the one just before the drop in PaO2 or peripheral blood oxygen saturation during a step-down trial.
Intrinsic PEEP (iPEEP) or auto-PEEP—first described by John Marini of St. Paul Regions Hospital—is a potentially unrecognized contributor to PEEP in intubated individuals.
When ventilating at high frequencies, its contribution can be substantial, particularly in people with obstructive lung disease such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
iPEEP has been measured in very few formal studies on ventilation in ARDS, and its contribution is largely unknown.
Its measurement is recommended in the treatment of people who have ARDS, especially when using high-frequency (oscillatory/jet) ventilation.
The position of lung infiltrates in acute respiratory distress syndrome is non-uniform.
Repositioning into the prone position (face down) might improve oxygenation by relieving atelectasis and improving perfusion.
If this is done early in the treatment of severe ARDS, it confers a mortality benefit of 26% compared to supine ventilation.
However, attention should be paid to avoid the SIDS in the management of the respiratory distressed infants by continuous careful monitoring of their cardiovascular system.
Several studies have shown that pulmonary function and outcome are better in people with ARDS who lost weight or whose pulmonary wedge pressure was lowered by diuresis or fluid restriction.
As of 2019, it is uncertain whether or not treatment with corticosteroids improves overall survival.
Corticosteroids may increase the number of ventilator-free days during the first 28 days of hospitalization.Inhaled nitric oxide (NO) selectively widens the lung's arteries which allows for more blood flow to open alveoli for gas exchange.
Despite evidence of increased oxygenation status, there is no evidence that inhaled nitric oxide decreases morbidity and mortality in people with ARDS.
Furthermore, nitric oxide may cause kidney damage and is not recommended as therapy for ARDS regardless of severity.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is mechanically applied prolonged cardiopulmonary support.
There are two types of ECMO: Venovenous which provides respiratory support and venoarterial which provides respiratory and hemodynamic support.
People with ARDS who do not require cardiac support typically undergo venovenous ECMO.
Multiple studies have shown the effectiveness of ECMO in acute respiratory failure.
Specifically, the CESAR (Conventional ventilatory support versus Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for Severe Acute Respiratory failure) trial demonstrated that a group referred to an ECMO center demonstrated significantly increased survival compared to conventional management (63% to 47%).
As of 2019, there is no evidence showing that treatments with exogenous surfactants, statins, beta-blockers or n-acetylcysteine decreases early mortality, late all-cause mortality, duration of mechanical ventilation, or number of ventilator-free days.
The overall prognosis of ARDS is poor, with mortality rates of approximately 40%.
The annual incidence of ARDS is 13–23 people per 100,000 in the general population.
Its incidence in the mechanically ventilated population in intensive care units is much higher.
According to Brun-Buisson et al (2004), there is a prevalence of acute lung injury (ALI) of 16.1% percent in ventilated patients admitted for more than 4 hours.
Worldwide, severe sepsis is the most common trigger causing ARDS.
Other triggers include mechanical ventilation, sepsis, pneumonia, Gilchrist's disease, drowning, circulatory shock, aspiration, trauma—especially pulmonary contusion—major surgery, massive blood transfusions, smoke inhalation, drug reaction or overdose, fat emboli and reperfusion pulmonary edema after lung transplantation or pulmonary embolectomy.
However, the majority of these patients with all these conditions mentioned do not develop ARDS.
It is unclear why some people with the mentioned factors above do not develop ARDS and others do.
Pneumonia and sepsis are the most common triggers, and pneumonia is present in up to 60% of patients and may be either causes or complications of ARDS.
Alcohol excess appears to increase the risk of ARDS.
Diabetes was originally thought to decrease the risk of ARDS, but this has shown to be due to an increase in the risk of pulmonary edema.
Elevated abdominal pressure of any cause is also probably a risk factor for the development of ARDS, particularly during mechanical ventilation.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome was first described in 1967 by Ashbaugh et al.
Initially there was no clearly established definition, which resulted in controversy regarding the incidence and death of ARDS.
In 1988, an expanded definition was proposed, which quantified physiologic respiratory impairment.
In 1994, a new definition was recommended by the American-European Consensus Conference Committee   which recognized the variability in severity of pulmonary injury.The definition required the following criteria be met:
bilateral infiltrates on chest radiograph consistent with pulmonary edema
hypoxemia, defined as PaO2:FiO2 < 200 mmHg (26.7 kPa)
absence of left atrial (LA) hypertension
pulmonary artery wedge pressure < 18 mmHg (obtained by pulmonary artery catheterization)
if no measured LA pressure available, there must be no other clinical evidence to suggest elevated left heart pressure.If PaO2:FiO2 < 300 mmHg (40 kPa), then the definitions recommended a classification as "acute lung injury" (ALI).
Note that according to these criteria, arterial blood gas analysis and chest X-ray were required for formal diagnosis.
Limitations of these definitions include lack of precise definition of acuity, nonspecific imaging criteria, lack of precise definition of hypoxemia with regards to PEEP (affects arterial oxygen partial pressure), arbitrary PaO2 thresholds without systematic data.
In 2012, the Berlin Definition of ARDS was devised by the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine, and was endorsed by the American Thoracic Society and the Society of Critical Care Medicine.
These recommendations were an effort to both update classification criteria in order to improve clinical usefulness and to clarify terminology.
Notably, the Berlin guidelines discourage the use of the term "acute lung injury" or ALI, as the term was commonly being misused to characterize a less severe degree of lung injury.
Instead, the committee proposes a classification of ARDS severity as mild, moderate or severe according to arterial oxygen saturation.
The Berlin definitions represent the current international consensus guidelines for both clinical and research classification of ARDS.
ARDS is the severe form of acute lung injury (ALI) and of transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI).
The Berlin definition included ALI as a mild form of ARDS.
However, the criteria for the diagnosis of ARDS in the Berlin definition excludes many children and a new definition for children was called pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS).
This is known as the PALLIC definition.
There is ongoing research on the treatment of ARDS by interferon (IFN) beta-1a to aid in preventing leakage of vascular beds.
Traumakine (FP-1201-lyo) is a recombinant human IFN beta-1a drug, developed by the Finnish company Faron Pharmaceuticals, which is undergoing international phase-III clinical trials after an open-label, early-phase trial showed an 81% reduction-in-odds of 28-day mortality in ICU patients with ARDS.
The drug is known to function by enhancing lung CD73 expression and increasing production of anti-inflammatory adenosine, such that vascular leaking and escalation of inflammation are reduced.Aspirin has been studied in those who are at high risk and was not found to be useful.An intravenous ascorbic acid treatment was tested in the 2019 RCT, in people with ARDS due to sepsis and there was no change in primary endpoints.
Respiratory monitoring
The ICU Book.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
ISBN 978-0781748025.
Martin GS, Moss M, Wheeler AP, Mealer M, Morris JA, Bernard GR (1 August 2005).
"A randomized, controlled trial of furosemide with or without albumin in hypoproteinemic patients with acute lung injury".
Crit.
Care Med. 33 (8): 1681–7.
doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000171539.47006.02.
PMID 16096441.
"Blood transfusion and the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome: more evidence that blood transfusion in the intensive care unit may not be benign".
Crit.
Care Med. 33 (6): 1420–1.
doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000167073.99222.50.
PMID 15942365.
"Acute respiratory distress syndrome".
65 (9): 1823–30.
PMID 12018805.
"Antioxidant status in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome".
25 (2): 180–185.
doi:10.1007/s001340050813.
PMID 10193545.
ARDSNet—the NIH / NHLBI ARDS Network
ARDS Support Center—information for patients with ARDS
