Coronavirus
With the increase in numbers of the coronavirus worldwide, and the fast changing information about the virus, we will share the most current information with you, so you can take this into consideration when making your travel plans.
Always consult the information provided by the local authorities in case you have trips booked already to locations with confirmed cases of this virus.
What is the Coronavirus
Coronavirus disease 2019 or COVID-19 is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
A coronavirus belongs to the same family as SARS and MERS, which originated in bats.
The virus was first reported in Wuhan, Hubei province in China, in December 2019 and is thought to be first transmitted by possibly a bat as well, but it is now spreading from person to person.
Transmission
It appears that the virus is spread through respiratory droplets from a person's coughs and sneezes in a range of approx. 6 feet (1.80 meters).
Traces of the virus have also been found in the stools of infected patients.
You also have to be cautious of surfaces that can be contaminated, although it is not sure yet if and how long the virus will survive on such surfaces.
Current estimates are based on SARS CoV-2, which is very similar to COVID-19.
The primary infections of the virus are believed to be through transmission via persons who are displaying symptoms.
However, medical experts have voiced increasing suspicions that asymptomatic carriers have played a large part in the rapid spread of the virus.
Symptoms
Fever
Dry cough
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
Sore throat
Headache
Muscle pain or joint pain
Chills
Nasal congestion
Haemoptysis
When the virus develops further, it could lead to:
acute respiratory distress syndrome
sepsis
septic shock
death
Some people who are infected may not have any symptoms, but can infect others as asymptomatic carriers.
Recent developments suggest that asymptomatic individuals may experience a complete loss of smell, or ansomia.
This symptom appears before any others and may indicate a person is infected.
Doctors advise that individuals who have close contact with confirmed patients should be monitored and exams should be done so that infection can be ruled out.
Treatment
There is no vaccine at the moment, but around the world organisations are working hard in order to develop such vaccine.
People with COVID-19 receive care to relieve symptoms, in severe cases treatment include support of vital organs functions including artificial respiration.
Since there is no vaccine, some patients receive generic antivirals.
Prevention
Advise from the WHO
Wash your hands frequently
Regularly disinfect frequently-touched surfaces, such as doorknobs
Avoid touching nose, mouth and eyes
Practice respiratory hygiene
If you have a fever, cough, and difficulty breathing, seek medical advice immediately
If you have visited or live in an area where COVID-19 is spreading, you need to follow these directions and stay home, away from others.
Do not visit a hospital or clinic in person.
Instead, call and inform them of your symptoms and if you have traveled so that they can start the proper protocol that is in place at that time.
Outbreak situation
There have been confirmed numbers of infected patients in the following locations:
Passengers arriving from Iran, Italy, Japan or Korea (Rep.) and traveling to Beijing (PEK), Guangzhou (CAN) or Shanghai (PVG) are subject to quarantine for 14 days.
April 8: – The lockdown in Wuhan, epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak, has been lifted today after 11 weeks.
The city is now open for business and people can now travel across its borders.
South Korea: Visitors who have been in the Hubei Province (China People's Rep.) in the past 14 days are not allowed to transit or enter Korea (Rep.).
Nationals of China (People's Rep) with a passport issued in the Hubei Province are not allowed to enter Korea (Rep.).
Korean visas issued by the Wuhan Consulate in the Hubei Province are invalidated.
A visa is required to transit through Korea (Rep.) for:
- nationals of China (People's Rep.) arriving from China (People's Rep); and
- visa required nationals arriving from China (People's Rep.).
Visitors arriving from Japan who have been in the cruise ship 'Diamond Princess' are not allowed to transit or enter (Korea Rep.).
Visas issued to nationals of Japan (at Korean Diplomatic Missions in Japan) before 9 March 2020 are invalidated.
- This does not apply to visas issued outside Japan.
- This does not apply to airline crew.
Nationals of Japan who do not hold a Korean visa issued on or after 9 March 2020 will not be allowed entry.
Iran: Nationals of China (People's Rep.) with a normal passport, passengers with a Hong Kong (SAR China) passport and passengers with a Macao (SAR China) passport are no longer visa exempt.
However, they can obtain a visa on arrival.
They are required to clear the medical and health check upon arrival.
After that they will be given a certificate.
Based on the travel advisory restriction issued by United Arab Emirates Government, nationals of United Arab Emirates are not allowed to travel to Iran.
Italy:
The whole country is under lockdown conditions at least until May 3rd.
Private and public events such as Serie A football league and all sports events, concerts and exhibitions are cancelled/postponed.
Schools and universities are closed.
Ski facilities are closed.
Public gathering is prohibited.
All shops are closed except for groceries, pharmacies and newsstands.
Some activities such as bookshops allowed to reopen from April 15th though public access may be subject to limitations.
Postal services and banks are working.
Transfers from town to town are prohibited unless you can demonstrate a valid reason.
Public transport is working, however there may be limitations.
People are recommended to stay home as much as possible and get out only for valid reasons (that is, buy food).
Japan: Both Tokyo Disneyland and DisneySea are closed and tentatively set to reopen in April 2020.
The Tokyo 2020 Olympics have been postponed until 2021.
Several major cherry blossom festivals have also been canceled, including Tokyo's Nakameguro Cherry Blossom Festival.
France: Tomorrowland Winter in the French Alps (Huez, March 14-21) has been cancelled.
Spain: Spain has declared the 'State of alarm' in the evening of March 13.
United States: South by Southwest Music Festival (Austin, March 16-22) has been cancelled
Disneyland California will be closed until the end of March.
Starting Friday March 13, the US will not allow entry to flights from Europe.
Several states have instated nightly curfews and have begun restricting gathering of people.
Switzerland: Switzerland's Federal Council announced an immediate ban on all public and private events involving more than 1000 participants
Australia: From 21:00 AEDT 20 March 2020, only Australian citizens, residents and immediate family members can travel to Australia.
From 23:59 AEDT on 28 March 2020, all travellers arriving in Australia (including Australian Citizens and Permanent residents) will be required to undertake a mandatory 14-day quarantine at designated facilities (for example, a hotel), in their port of arrival.​
Seriously, Don't come.
Kuweit: Authorities have suspended all flights to and from Kuwait until further notice
Greece: All schools have been closed from March 10, for 2 weeks.
Austria: Citizens of Italy are not allowed to enter Austria without valid medical fitness certificate (tested negative on ncov19)
Vietnam: If you’ve transited through or travelled from the 26 Schengen countries or the UK within the past 14 days, you’ll not be issued a visa, and you’ll be denied entry into Vietnam even if you have a valid visa or visa letter.
Vietnam has suspended visas on arrival for all foreign travellers.
Expect to complete a mandatory health declaration on arrival.
You may be required to undergo intensive health screening or quarantine if symptoms are found.
From 16 March, masks are mandatory for all passengers on flights to and from Vietnam, including at airports and in all public places in Vietnam.
Czech Republic: The parliament of Czechia announced an immediate ban on all public and private events involving more than 100 participants.
All schools (elementary, high schools and universities) and cultural facilities (including cinemas, theatres, galleries, libraries and museums) have to remain closed until further notice.
Passengers who have transited through or have been in China or Italy in the past 14 days have to stay in quarantine at home for at least 2 weeks.
Ireland: Ireland is closing all schools, starting March 12, 6pm local time, until March 29.
Portugal: 100.000 persons have been put in social isolation in the district of Porto, where 19 of the infected persons in Portugal are located.
All schools will remain closed starting monday March 16, until March 29.
Further restrictions about public services, bars, restaurants etc will be announced soon.
Starting March 16 the borders between Spain and Portugal will be closed.
Portugal declared State of Emergency starting 00.00 March 19.
Restrictions will be announced.
Slovenia: Slovenia has declared a state of epidemic and a temporary ban on the sale of goods and services to consumers.
All persons on the territory of Slovenia are advised to limit public exposure and display maximum prudence in day-to-day activities.
All non-essential services and shops are closed until further notice.
This includes, but is not limited to, accomodation, wellness, sports and other recreational, cinematic, cultural, hairdressing & cosmetic & pedicure and gambling services.
Grocery stores, pharmacies and other medically & orthopedically oriented stores, petrol stations, banks, postal offices, delivery services, gardening and other agriculturally related stores, newspaper & magazines kiosks and other emergency services needed to ensure public safety and health remain open.
The government of Slovenia has issued an immediate ban on all private and public social events involving more than 100 participants in closed space.
All educational institutions (kindergarten, elementary & high schools, universities) and cultural facilities (including cinemas, theatres, mass, libraries and museums) are closed until further notice.
Public transport is temporarily offline (emergency assistance services and prearranged taxi services are exempted from government ban)
Crossing from Italian border is now limited exclusively to freight transport and persons with special permits.
All others are turned away.
More Information
Be careful which sources you check with regards to the virus, here are some reliable ones:
World Health Organization
IATA
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC
The cruise industry has also been hit big time due to the Coronavirus.
If you are booked on a cruise, closely monitor your cruiselines's website for possible, cancellations, changes in itinerary, updates about Corona numbers on board etc.
Travel restrictions
Governments have been placing travel restrictions on citizens of Covid-19 hotspots since early January.
Many countries and regions including most of the Schengen area, Armenia, Australia, India, Iraq, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Vietnam, the United States have imposed temporary entry bans on Chinese citizens or recent visitors to China, or have stopped issuing visas and reimposed visa requirements on Chinese citizens.
