Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on education
The 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic has affected educational systems worldwide, leading to the widespread closures of schools and universities.
As of 8 April 2020, approximately 1.716 billion learners have been affected due to school closures in response to COVID-19.
According to UNESCO monitoring, 188 countries have implemented nationwide closures and 5 have implemented local closures, impacting about 99.4%  of the world's student population.
On 23 March 2020, Cambridge International Examinations (CIE) released a statement announcing the cancellation of Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge O Level, Cambridge International AS & A Level, Cambridge AICE Diploma, and Cambridge Pre-U examinations for the May/June 2020 series across all countries.
International Baccalaureate exams have also been cancelled.School closures impact not only students, teachers, and families, but have far-reaching economic and societal consequences.
School closures in response to COVID-19 have shed light on various social and economic issues, including student debt, digital learning, food insecurity, and homelessness, as well as access to childcare, health care, housing, internet, and disability services.
The impact was more severe for disadvantaged children and their families, causing interrupted learning, compromised nutrition, childcare problems, and consequent economic cost to families who could not work.In response to school closures, UNESCO recommended the use of distance learning programmes and open educational applications and platforms that schools and teachers can use to reach learners remotely and limit the disruption of education.
Efforts to stem the spread of COVID-19 through non-pharmaceutical interventions and preventive measures such as social-distancing and self-isolation have prompted the widespread closure of primary, secondary, and tertiary schooling in over 100 countries.Previous outbreaks of infectious diseases have prompted widespread school closings around the world, with varying levels of effectiveness.
Mathematical modelling has shown that transmission of an outbreak may be delayed by closing schools.
However, effectiveness depends on the contacts children maintain outside of school.
School closures may be effective when enacted promptly.
If school closures occur late relative to an outbreak, they are less effective and may not have any impact at all.
Additionally, in some cases, the reopening of schools after a period of closure has resulted in increased infection rates.
As closures tend to occur concurrently with other interventions such as public gathering bans, it can be difficult to measure the specific impact of school closures.During the 1918-1919 influenza pandemic in the United States, school closures and public gathering bans were associated with lower total mortality rates.
Cities that implemented such interventions earlier had greater delays in reaching peak mortality rates.
Schools closed for a median duration of 4 weeks according to a study of 43 US cities' response to the Spanish Flu.
School closures were shown to reduce morbidity from the Asian flu by 90% during the 1957–58 outbreak, and up to 50% in controlling influenza in the US, 2004–2008.Multiple countries successfully slowed the spread of infection through school closures during the 2009 H1N1 Flu pandemic.
School closures in the city of Oita, Japan, were found to have successfully decreased the number of infected students at the peak of infection; however closing schools was not found to have significantly decreased the total number of infected students.
Mandatory school closures and other social distancing measures were associated with a 29% to 37% reduction in influenza transmission rates.
Early school closures in the United States delayed the peak of the 2009 H1N1 Flu pandemic.
Despite the overall success of closing schools, a study of school closures in Michigan found that "district level reactive school closures were ineffective."During the swine flu outbreak in 2009 in the UK, in an article titled "Closure of schools during an influenza pandemic" published in the Lancet Infectious Diseases, a group of epidemiologists endorsed the closure of schools in order to interrupt the course of the infection, slow further spread and buy time to research and produce a vaccine.
Having studied previous influenza pandemics including the 1918 flu pandemic, the influenza pandemic of 1957 and the 1968 flu pandemic, they reported on the economic and workforce effect school closure would have, particularly with a large percentage of doctors and nurses being women, of whom half had children under the age of 16.
They also looked at the dynamics of the spread of influenza in France during French school holidays and noted that cases of flu dropped when schools closed and re-emerged when they re-opened.
They noted that when teachers in Israel went on strike during the flu season of 1999–2000, visits to doctors and the number of respiratory infections dropped by more than a fifth and more than two fifths respectively.
For schools and childcare facilities, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends short-term closure to clean or disinfect if an infected person has been in a school building regardless of community spread.
When there is minimal to moderate community transmission, social distancing strategies can be implemented such as cancelling field trips, assemblies, and other large gatherings such as physical education or choir classes or meals in a cafeteria, increasing the space between desks, staggering arrival and dismissal times, limiting nonessential visitors, and using a separate health office location for children with flu-like symptoms.
When there is substantial transmission in the local community, in addition to social distancing strategies, extended school dismissals may be considered.
On 26 January, China instituted measures to contain the COVID-19 outbreak which included extending the Spring Festival holiday to contain the outbreak.
Universities and schools around the country closed.
On 23 February, Iran's Ministry of Health announced the closure of universities, higher educational institutions and schools in several cities and provinces.
On 3 March, UNESCO released the first global numbers on school closures and affected students.
It reported that 13 countries had enacted preventive measures including the temporary closure of schools and universities, impacting 290.5 million students around the world.
In reaction, UNESCO called on countries to support affected students and families and facilitate large-scale inclusive distance learning programmes.
On 4 March, the Italian government ordered the full closure of all schools and universities nationwide as Italy reached 100 deaths.
In doing so, Italy became one of 22 countries on three continents which had announced or implemented school closures.
On 5 March, the majority of learners affected by COVID-19 emergency measures were located in China, with 233 million learners affected, followed by Japan at 16.5 million and Iran at 14.5 million.
By 10 March, one in five students worldwide was "staying away from school due to the COVID-19 crisis" while another one in four was barred from higher education institutions.
On 13 March, governments in 49 countries announced or implemented school closures, including 39 countries which closed schools nationwide and 22 countries with localised school closures.
By 16 March, this figure increased from 49 to 73 countries according to UNESCO.
By 19 March, 50% of students worldwide were affected by school closures, corresponding to nationwide closures in 102 countries and local closures in 11 countries affecting 850 million children and youth.
By 20 March, over 70% of the world's learners were impacted by closures, with 124 country-wide school closures.
On 23 March, all Nigerian school were found to have been closed down by Nigerian government, markets as well as companies were closed down and children were forbidden by parents to step out of their homes.
On 26 March, all New Zealand schools and universities have been closed down across the country.
The government has imposed a two-week holiday, allowing schools to transition to forms of distant teaching as soon as possible.
Universities have closed for one week, but resumed with online teaching afterwards.
Other school services remain open, but teaching is restricted to distant learning.
By 27 March, nearly 90 percent of the world's student population was out of class.
Regions with schools remaining open included Taiwan, Singapore, Australia, Sweden, and some U.S. states.
By 29 March, more than 1.5 billion children and other students were affected by nationwide school closures.
Others were disrupted by localized closures.
Until April 6, holidays were extended in all secondary schools of Turkmenistan.
An order signed by the Ministry of Education as a preventative measure aims to prevent the spread of respiratory diseases in connection with the WHO coronavirus pandemic.
10 countries have localised schools closures, UNESCO estimates  473,933,356  learners are potentially at risk (pre-primary to upper-secondary education) and 77,938,904 learners are potentially at risk in tertiary education.
Note: Figures correspond to total number of learners enrolled at pre-primary, primary, lower-secondary, and upper-secondary levels of education [ISCED levels 0 to 3], as well as at tertiary education levels [ISCED levels 5 to 8] who could be affected should localised closures become countrywide.
Enrolment figures based on latest UNESCO Institute of Statistics data.
School closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have shed a light on numerous issues affecting access to education, as well as broader socio-economic issues.
As of March 12, more than 370 million children and youth are not attending school because of temporary or indefinite country wide school closures mandated by governments in an attempt to slow the spread of COVID-19.
As of 29 March, nearly 90% of the world's learners were impacted by closures.Even when school closures are temporary, it carries high social and economic costs.
The disruptions they cause affect people across communities, but their impact is more severe for disadvantaged children and their families including interrupted learning, compromised nutrition, childcare problems and consequent economic cost to families who cannot work.
Working parents are more likely to miss work when schools close in order to take care of their children, incurring wage loss in many instances and negatively impacting productivity.
Localised school closures place burdens on schools as parents and officials redirect children to schools that are open.
Women often represent a large share of health-care workers and often cannot attend work because of childcare obligations that result from school closures.
This means that many medical professionals are not at the facilities where they are most needed during a health crisis.
Lack of access to technology or fast, reliable internet access can prevent students in rural areas and from disadvantaged families.
Lack of access to technology or good internet connectivity is an obstacle to continued learning, especially for students from disadvantaged families.
In response to school closures caused by COVID-19, UNESCO recommends the use of distance learning programmes and open educational applications and platforms that schools and teachers can use to reach learners remotely and limit the disruption of education.To aid in slowing the transmission of COVID-19, hundreds of libraries have temporarily closed.
In the United States, numerous major cities announced public library closures, including Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, and New York City, affecting 221 libraries.
For students without internet at home, this increases the difficulty of keeping up with distance learning.
School closures puts a strain on parents and guardians to provide childcare and manage distance learning while children are out of school.
In the absence of alternative options, working parents often leave children alone when schools close and this can lead to risky behaviours, including increased influence of peer pressure and substance abuse.
Many children worldwide rely on free or discounted meals at schools.
When schools close, nutrition is compromised.Nutrition plays a critical role in cognitive development and academic performance for children.In Washington State, around 45% of the states 1.1 million students enrolled in traditional public and charter schools qualify for subsidised school meals.
At least 520,000 students and their families may be affected by food insecurity as a result of school closures.School lunch programmes are the second-biggest anti-hunger initiative in the United States after food stamps.
Every year, nearly 30 million children rely on schools to provide free or low-cost meals including breakfast, lunch, snacks, and even dinner.In Alabama, where state-wide school closures as of 18 March have affected over 720,000 students, the state Superintendent announced that staff in schools disproportionately affected by poverty would create meal distribution networks to provide food for students who rely on school lunches.
School closures negatively impact student learning outcomes.
Schooling provides essential learning and when schools close, children and youth are deprived opportunities for growth and development.
The disadvantages are disproportionate for under-privileged learners who tend to have fewer educational opportunities beyond school.Student drop-out rates tend to increase as an effect of school closures due to the challenge of ensuring all students return to school once school closures ends.
This is especially true of protracted closures.Schools are hubs of social activity and human interaction.
When schools are closed, many children and youth miss out of on social contact that is essential to learning and development.When schools close parents are often asked to facilitate the learning of children at home and can struggle to perform this task.
This is especially true for parents with limited education and resources.
Potential impacts of school closures and reliance on distance learning are not addressed in federal acts of legislation at this time.
Formal education — as opposed to informal education or non-formal education — tends to refer to schools, colleges, universities and training institutions.
A 1974 report by the World Bank defined formal education as the following:Formal education: the hierarchically structured, chronologically graded ‘education system’, running from primary school through the university and including, in addition to general academic studies, a variety of specialised programmes and institutions for full-time technical and professional training.The majority of data collected on the number of students and learners impacted by COVID-19 has been calculated based on the closure of formal education systems.
The UNESCO Institute for Statistics provides figures on students impacted by COVID-19 corresponding to the number of learners enrolled at pre-primary, primary, lower-secondary, and upper-secondary levels of education [ISCED levels 0 to 3], as well as at tertiary education levels [ISCED levels 5 to 8].
Early childhood educational programmes are usually designed for children below the age of 3 and may refer to preschools, nursery schools, kindergartens, and some day care programmes.
While many primary and secondary schools have closed around the world due to COVID-19, measures impacting early childhood educational programmes have varied.
In some countries and territories, preschools and day cares are considered necessary services and have not closed in tandem with broader school closure measures.In the United States, the Washington State Department of Children, Youth, and Families encouraged child care and early learning centres to stay open.
Some school districts may offer alternative child care options, prioritising the children of first responders and healthcare workers.
The governor of Maryland mandated that specific child care services remain open for the children of emergency personnel while Washington State and California have left it to the discretion of care providers.
California Governor Gavin Newsom explained his state's position, saying “We need our child care facilities, our daycare centers, to operate to absorb the impact of these school closures.”
Colorado has encouraged the development of "tool kits" for parents to use at home to emulate the lessons children would have received in their early learning programmes.In Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe closed all schools throughout the country until April 8, however, children's daycare facilities were excluded.
In early March, five adults associated with a nursing facility for preschool children in Kobe tested positive for coronavirus.
After testing over one hundred children at the facility, a preschool student was found to be carrying the virus.
Primary or elementary education typically consists of the first four to seven years of formal education.
The International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO) canceled the examinations for its Diploma Programme and Career-related Programme candidates scheduled between 30 April and 22 May 2020, reportedly affecting more than 200,000 students worldwide.
The IBO stated that it would award candidates their diplomas or certificates based on "their coursework" and "the established assessment expertise, rigor, and quality control already built into the programme."
Tertiary education, also known as higher education, refers to the non-compulsory educational levels that follow completion of secondary school or high school.
Tertiary education is normally taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate education, as well as vocational education and training.
Individuals who complete tertiary education generally receive certificates, diplomas, or academic degrees.
Undergraduate education is education conducted after secondary education and prior to post-graduate education, for which the learner is typically awarded a bachelor's degree.
Students enrolled in higher education programmes at colleges, universities, and community colleges are often refereed to in countries such as United States as "college students."The closure of colleges and universities has widespread implications for students, faculty, administrators, and the institutions themselves.
Colleges and universities across the United States have been called upon to issue refunds to students for the cost of tuition and room and board.
In the United States of America, Colleges and universities operate as "mini-cities" which generate significant revenue for cities, states, and regions.
For example, Princeton University contributed $1.58 billion USD to the New Jersey economy and students spent about $60 million in off-campus spending.
College and university closures have a domino effect on economies with far-reaching implications.According to Linda Bilmes of the Harvard Kennedy School, "local hotels, restaurants, cafes, shops, car rental agencies and other local businesses obtain a significant share of annual revenue from graduation week and college reunions...
these communities will suffer a lot of economic damage if the colleges remain closed at that time."Small towns which rely on college students to support the local economy and provide labour to local businesses are especially impacted by school closures and the exodus of students from campus.
In Ithaca, New York, Cornell University students spent at least $4 million a week in Tompkins county.
In the wake of Cornell's decision to keep students home following spring break and transition to virtual instruction, the Mayor of Ithaca called for "immediate and forceful federal action — we will see a horrific economic impact as a result of Cornell University closing."
UNESCO is sharing 10 recommendations during this period:
Examine the readiness and choose the most relevant tools: Decide on the use high-technology and low-technology solutions based on the reliability of local power supplies, internet connectivity, and digital skills of teachers and students.
This could range through integrated digital learning platforms, video lessons, MOOCs, to broadcasting through radios and TVs.
Ensure inclusion of the distance learning programmes: Implement measures to ensure that students including those with disabilities or from low-income backgrounds have access to distance learning programmes, if only a limited number of them have access to digital devices.
Consider temporarily decentralising such devices from computer labs to families and support them with internet connectivity.
Protect data privacy and data security: Assess data security when uploading data or educational resources to web spaces, as well as when sharing them with other organisations or individuals.
Ensure that the use of applications and platforms does not violate students’ data privacy.
Prioritize solutions to address psychosocial challenges before teaching: Mobilize available tools to connect schools, parents, teachers, and students with each other.
Create communities to ensure regular human interactions, enable social caring measures, and address possible psychosocial challenges that students may face when they are isolated.
Plan the study schedule of the distance learning programmes: Organise discussions with stakeholders to examine the possible duration of school closures and decide whether the distance learning programme should focus on teaching new knowledge or enhance students’ knowledge of prior lessons.
Plan the schedule depending on the situation of the affected zones, level of studies, needs of students needs, and availability of parents.
Choose the appropriate learning methodologies based on the status of school closures and home-based quarantines.
Avoid learning methodologies that require face-to-face communication.
Provide support to teachers and parents on the use of digital tools: Organise brief training or orientation sessions for teachers and parents as well, if monitoring and facilitation are needed.
Help teachers to prepare the basic settings such as solutions to the use of internet data if they are required to provide live streaming of lessons.
Blend appropriate approaches and limit the number of applications and platforms: Blend tools or media that are available for most students, both for synchronous communication and lessons, and for asynchronous learning.
Avoid overloading students and parents by asking them to download and test too many applications or platforms.
Develop distance learning rules and monitor students’ learning process: Define the rules with parents and students on distance learning.
Design formative questions, tests, or exercises to monitor closely students’ learning process.
Try to use tools to support submission of students’ feedback and avoid overloading parents by requesting them to scan and send students’ feedback
Define the duration of distance learning units based on students’ self-regulation skills: Keep a coherent timing according to the level of the students’ self-regulation and metacognitive abilities especially for livestreaming classes.
Preferably, the unit for primary school students should not be more than 20 minutes, and no longer than 40 minutes for secondary school students.
Create communities and enhance connection: Create communities of teachers, parents, and school managers to address sense of loneliness or helplessness, facilitate sharing of experience and discussion on coping strategies when facing learning difficulties.
List of major events affected by the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic
Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on science and technology
Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on sports
Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on religion
Impact of the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic on cinema
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
290 million students out of school due to COVID-19: UNESCO releases first global numbers and mobilizes response,   UNESCO.
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page.
For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
COVID-19 Educational Disruption and Response,   UNESCO.
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page.
For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
How to plan distance learning solutions during temporary schools closures,   UNESCO.
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page.
For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Adverse consequences of school closures,   UNESCO.
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page.
For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
UNESCO - COVID-19 Educational Disruption and Response
